Story Title: Democritus and the People of Abdera
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8439
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

How I have always hated the opinions of the mob! To me, a mobseems profane, unjust, and rash, putting false construction on allthings, and judging every matter by a mob-made standard.Democritus had experience of this. His countrymen thought him mad.Little minds! But then, no one is a prophet in his own country! Thepeople themselves were mad, of course, and Democritus was the wise man.Nevertheless the error went so far that the city of Abdera[6] sent amessenger to the great physician Hippocrates, requesting him both byletter and by spoken word to come and restore the sage's reason."Our citizen," said the spokesman with tears in his eyes, "has lost hiswits, alas! Study has corrupted Democritus. If he were less wise weshould esteem him much more. He will have it that there is no limit tothe number of worlds like ours and that possibly they are inhabited withnumberless Democrituses. Not satisfied with these wild dreams, he talksalso of atoms—phantoms born only in his own empty brain. Then,measuring the very heavens, though he remains here below to do it, heclaims to know the universe; yet admits that he does not know himself.Time was when he could control debates, now he mutters only to himself.So come, thou divine mortal, for the patient's case is a bad one."Hippocrates, though he had little faith in these people, wentnevertheless. Now mark, I beg of you, what strange meetings fate maybring about in this life! Hippocrates arrived just at the time when thisman, who was supposed to have neither sense nor reason, happened to besearching into a question as to whether this very reason was seated inthe heart or in the head of men and beasts.Sitting in leafy shade, beside a brook, and with many a volume at hisfeet, he was occupied wholly with a study of the convolutions of thebrain; and thus absorbed, as his manner was, he scarcely noticed theadvance of his friend the learned physician. Their greeting was soonover as you may imagine, for the sage is at all times chary of time andspeech. So having put aside mere trifles of conversation, they reasonedupon man and his mind, and next fell to talking upon ethics.It is not necessary that I should here enlarge upon what each had to sayto the other on these matters.The little tale suffices to show that we may rightly take exception tothe judgments of the mob. That being so, in what sense is it true, as Ihave read in a certain passage, that the voice of the people is thevoice of God?[6] A city on the shores of Thracia.