Story Title: The Arbiter, the Hospitaller, and the Hermit
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8460
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

Three saints, all equally zealous and anxious for theirsalvation, had the same ideal, although the means by which they strovetowards it were different. But as all roads lead to Rome, these threewere each content to choose their own path.One, touched by the cares, the tediousness, and the reverses which seemto be inevitably attached to lawsuits, offered, without any reward, tojudge and settle all causes submitted to him. To make a fortune on thisearth was not an end he had in view.Ever since there have been laws, man, for his sins, has condemnedhimself to litigation half his lifetime. Half? three-quarters, I shouldsay, and sometimes the whole. This good conciliator imagined he couldcure the silly and detestable craze for going to law.The second saint chose the hospitals as his field of labour. I admirehim. Kindly care taken to alleviate the sufferings of mankind is acharity I prefer before all others.The sick of those days were much as they are now—peevish, impatient,and ever grumbling. They gave our poor hospitaller plenty of work. Theywould say, "Ah! he cares very particularly for such and such. They arehis friends, hence we are neglected."But bad as were these complaints they were nothing to those which thearbiter had to face. He got himself into a sorry tangle. No one wascontent. Arbitration pleased neither one side nor the other. Accordingto them the judge could never succeed in holding the balance level. Nowonder that at last the self-appointed judge grew weary.He betook himself to the hospitals. There he found that theself-sacrificing hospitaller had nothing better to tell of his results.Complaints and murmurs were all that either could gain.With sad hearts they gave up their endeavours and repaired to the silentwood, there to live down their sorrows. In these retreats, at a spotsheltered from the sun, gently tended by the breezes, and near a purerivulet, they found the third saint, and of him they asked advice."Advice," said he, "is only to be sought of yourselves; for who, betterthan yourselves, can know your own needs? The knowledge of oneself isthe first care imposed upon mankind by the Almighty. Have you obeyedthis mandate whilst out in the world? If there you did not learn to knowyourselves, these tranquil shades will certainly help you; for nowhereelse is it possible. Stir up this stream. Do you now see yourselvesreflected in it? No! How could you, when the mud is like a thick cloudbetween us and the crystal? But let it settle, my brothers, and then youwill see your image. The better to study yourselves live in thedesert."The lonely hermit was believed and the others followed his wise counsel.It does not follow that people should not be well employed. Since somemust plead; since men die and fall ill, doctors are a necessity and soalso are lawyers. These ministers, thank God, will never fail us. Thewealth and honours to be won make one sure of that. Nevertheless, inthese general needs one is apt to neglect oneself. And you, judges,ministers, and princes, who give all your time to the public weal; you,who are troubled by countless annoyances and disappointments,disheartened by failure and corrupted by good fortune—you do not seeyourselves. You see no one. Should some good impulse lead you to thinkover these matters, some flatterer breaks in and distracts you.This lesson is the ending of this work. May the centuries to come findit a useful one. I present it to kings. I propose it to the wise. Whatbetter ending could I make?