Story Title: The Wishes
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8428
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

When the Great Mogul held empire, there were certain littlesprites who used to undertake all sorts of tasks helpful to mankind.They would do housework, stable-work, and even gardening. But if oneinterfered with them, all would be spoilt.One of these friendly sprites cultivated the garden of a worthy familyliving near the Ganges. His duties were performed deftly andnoiselessly. He loved not only his master and mistress, but the gardenalso. Possibly the zephyrs, who are said to be friends of the sprites,helped him in his tasks. At any rate he did his very best, and neverceased in his efforts to load his hosts with every pleasure. To provehis zeal he would have stayed with these people for ever, in spite ofthe natural propensity of his kind for waywardness. But his mischievousfellow-sprites fell to plotting. They induced the chief of their band toremove him to another field of labour. This the chief promised and,either by caprice or by policy, finally brought about. Orders came thatthe devoted worker should set out for the uttermost part of Norway,there to take charge of a house which at all times of the year wascovered with snow. So from being an Indian, the poor thing became aLaplander."I am forced to leave you," he said to his hosts, "but for what fault ofmine this has come to pass I cannot tell. I only know that go I must,and in a very little while too; a month perhaps, or maybe only a week.Make the most of the interval. Fortunately, I can fulfil three wishesfor you; but not more than three."To mankind there is nothing very out-of-the-way in merely wishing. Thesegood people decided that their first wish should be for abundance, andstraightway. Abundance, by the double-handful, poured gold into theircoffers; wheat into their granaries; wine into their cellars. Repletionwas everywhere. But, alas, what cares of direction, what accountkeeping; what time and anxiety this affluence involved!Thieves plotted against them. Great lords borrowed from them. The princetaxed them. They were, in fact, reduced to misery by this excess of goodfortune. At last they could endure it no longer. "Take back this awfuloverplus of wealth," they cried. "Even the poor are happy in comparisonwith us, and poverty is more covetable than such riches. Away, then,with these treasures! And thou, sweet Moderation, mother of all peace,sister of repose, come to us again!" With these words, which made theirsecond wish, lo! Moderation returned and they received her with openarms, once again enjoying peace.Thus at the end of these two wishes they were exactly where they were inthe first place, and so it is with all who are given to wishing, andwasting in dreams the time they had better have spent in doing. Butbeing philosophical people they laughed, and the sprite laughed withthem. To profit by his generosity when he had left them, they hazardedtheir third wish and asked for wisdom. Wisdom is a treasure which neverembarrasses.