Story Title: The Man Who Ran After Fortune and The Man Who Waited For her In his Bed
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8431
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

Who does not run after Fortune?I would I were in some spot whence I could watch the eager crowdsrushing from kingdom to kingdom in their vain chase after the daughterof Chance!They are indeed but faithful followers of a phantom; for when they thinkthey have her, lo! she is gone! Poor wretches! One must pity rather thanblame their foolishness. "That man," they say with sanguine voice,"raised cabbages; and now he is Pope! Are we not as good as he?" Ah!yes! a hundred times as good perhaps; but what of that? Fortune has noeyes for all your merit. Besides, is Papacy, after all, worth peace,which one must leave behind for it? Peace—a treasure that once was thepossession of gods alone—is seldom granted to the votaries of DameFortune. Do not seek her; and then she will seek you. That is the waywith women!There once were two friends, who lived comfortably and prosperedmoderately in a village; but one of them was always wishing to dobetter. One day he said to the other, "Suppose we left this place andtried our luck elsewhere? You know that a prophet is never received inhis own country!""You try, by all means," returned his friend, "but as for me, I amcontented where I am. I desire neither better climate nor betterpossibilities. You please yourself. Follow your unquiet spirit. You'llsoon return, and I shall sleep soundly enough awaiting you."So the man of ambition, or the money-grubber, whichever you like to callhim, took to the road, and arrived next day at a place where, ifanywhere, Dame Fortune should be found, namely, the court. He stayed atcourt for some long time, never missing an opportunity to put himself inthe way of favours. He was in evidence when the king went to bed, whenhe arose, and on all other propitious occasions."What's amiss?" he said at last. "Fortune, I am convinced, dwells here;for I have seen her the guest now of this one and now of that one. Howis it that I cannot entertain the capricious creature? I must try herelsewhere. I have already been told that the people of this place areexceedingly ambitious. Evidently there is no room for me here. So,adieu! gentleman of the court, and follow to the bitter end thiswill-o'-the-wisp! They tell me that Dame Fortune has temples in Surat.Very well! We will go there."He embarked at once. What hearts of bronze have humankind! The man whofirst attempted this awful route and defied its terrors must have had aheart of adamant. Often did our traveller turn his eyes towards hislittle home as first pirates, then contrary winds, then calms, thenrocks—all agents of death—in turn assailed him. Strange it is that menshould take such pains to meet death, since it will come only tooquickly to them in their homes!Our adventurer arrived in India. There they told him that Japan was theplace where Fortune dispensed her favours. He hurried there. The seawearied of carrying him about. In the end all the profit his longvoyages brought him was the lesson which he learnt from savages, andthat was: "Stop in your own country and let Nature instruct you." Japan,India, or anywhere else; no one place was better than another as ahunting ground for Fortune; so the conclusion was forced upon him thathe had been wiser had he stayed in his own village. At last he renouncedall these ungrateful wanderings and returned to his own country; and ashe caught sight of his homestead from afar he wept for joy, and cried:"Happy is the man who, staying in his home, finds constant occupation inadjusting his desires to his surroundings. To him the court, the sea,and the land of Fortune are but hearsay. Thou, fickle Dame, flauntingbefore our eyes dignities and wealth, dost cause us to follow afterthese allurements to the ends of the earth, only to find them emptyshams. Henceforth I wander no more, for here at home a hundred timesmore success shall I find."Having registered this vow against Fortune the wanderer came to the doorof his friend, and lo! there sat Fortune, waiting on the threshold,whilst his friend slumbered within.