Story Title: The Unhappily Married Man
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8425
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

If goodness were always the comrade of beauty I would seek awife to-morrow; but as divorce between these two is no new thing, and asthere are so few lovely forms that enshrine lovely souls, thus unitingboth one and the other delight, do not take it amiss that I refrain fromseeking such a rare combination.I have seen many marriages, but not one of them has held out allurementsfor me. Nevertheless, nearly the whole four quarters of mankindcourageously expose themselves to this the greatest of all hazards,and—the whole four quarters usually repent it.I will tell you of one who, having repented, found that there wasnothing for it but to send home again his quarrelsome, avaricious, andjealous spouse. She was one whom nothing pleased; for her, nothing wasright. For her, one rose too late; one retired too early. First it wasthis, then it was that, and then again 'twas something else. Theservants raged. The husband was at his wit's end. "You think of nothing,sir." "You spend too much." "You gad about, sir." "You are idle."Indeed she had so much to say that, in the end, tired of hearing such atermagant, he sent her to her parents in the country. There she mixedwith those who minded the turkeys and pigs until she was thought to besomewhat tamed, when the husband sent for her again."Well, my dear, how have you been getting on? How did you spend yourtime? Did you like the simple life of the country?""Oh, pretty well!" she said, "but what annoyed me was to see thelaziness of those people. They are worse there than here. They showed nocare whatever for the herds and flocks they were supposed to mind. Ididn't forget to let them know what I thought of them. Of course, theydidn't like it, and they all hated me in the end.""Ah! my dear. If you fell foul of people whom you saw for but a momentor so in the day and when they returned in the evening—if you made themtired of you; what will the servants in this house become, who must haveyou railing at them the whole day long? And what will your poor husbanddo whom you expected to have near you all day and night too? Return tothe village, my dear. Adieu! and if during my life the idea shouldpossess me to have you back again, may I, for my sins, have two such asyou for ever at my elbows in the world to come."