Story Title: The Companions of Ulysses
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8451
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

That great hero-wanderer Ulysses had been with his companionsdriven hither and thither at the will of the winds for ten years, neverknowing what their ultimate fate was to be. At length they disembarkedupon a shore where Circe, the daughter of Apollo, held her court.Receiving them she brewed a delicious but baneful liquor, which she madethem drink. The result of this was that first they lost their reason,and a few moments after, their bodies took the forms and features ofvarious animals; some unwieldy, some small. Ulysses alone, having thewisdom to withstand the temptation of the treacherous cup, escaped themetamorphosis. He, besides possessing wisdom, bore the look of a heroand had the gift of honeyed speech, so that it came about that thegoddess herself imbibed a poison little different from her own; that isto say, she became enamoured of the hero and declared her love to him.Now was the time for Ulysses to profit by this turn of events, and hewas too cunning to miss the opportunity, so he begged and obtained theboon that his friends should be restored to their natural shapes."But will they be willing to accept their own forms again?" asked thenymph. "Go to them and make them the offer."Ulysses, glad and eager, ran to his Greeks and cried, "The poisoned cuphas its remedy, and I come to offer it to you. Dear friends of mine,will you not be glad to have your manly forms again? Speak, for yourspeech is already restored."The lion was the first to reply. Making an effort to roar he said, "I,for one, am not such a fool. What! renounce all the great advantagesthat have just been given me? I have teeth. I have claws. I can pull topieces anything that attacks me. I am, in fact, a king. Do you think itwould suit me to become a citizen of Ithaca once more? Who knows butthat you might make of me a common soldier again. Thank you; but I willremain as I am."Ulysses, in sad surprise, turned to the bear. "Ah, brother! what form isthis you have taken, you who used to be so handsome?""Well, really! I like that!" said the bear in his way. "What form isthis? you ask. Why it is the form that a bear should have. Pray whoinstructed you that one form is more handsome than another? Is it yourbusiness to judge between us? I prefer to appeal to the sight of thegentler sex in our ursine race. Do I displease you? Then pass on. Goyour ways and leave me to mine. I am free and content as I am, and Itell you frankly and flatly that I will not change my state."The princely Greek then turned to a wolf with the same proposals, andrisking a similar rebuff said: "Comrade, it overwhelms me that a sweetyoung shepherdess should be driven to complain to the echoing crags ofthe gluttonous appetite that impelled you to devour her sheep. Time waswhen you would have protected her sheepfold. In those days you led anhonest life. Leave your lairs and become, instead of a wolf, an honestman again.""What is that?" answered the wolf. "I don't see your point. You comehere treating me as though I were a carnivorous beast. But what are you,who are talking in this strain? Would not you and yours have eaten thesesheep, which all the village is deploring, if I had not? Now say, onyour oath, do you really think I should have loved slaughter any less ifI had remained a man? For a mere word, you men are at times ready tostrangle each other. Are you not, therefore, as wolves one to another?All things considered, I maintain as a matter of fact that, rascal forrascal, it is better to be a wolf than a man. I decline to make anychange in my condition."In this way did Ulysses go from one to another making the samerepresentations and receiving from all, large and small alike, the samerefusals. Liberty, unbridled lust of appetite, the ambushes of thewoods, all these things were their supreme delight. They all renouncedthe glory attaching to great deeds.They thought that in following their passions they were enjoyingfreedom, not seeing that they were but slaves to themselves.