Story Title: The Cobbler and the Financier
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8433
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

There was once a cobbler who was so light hearted that he sangfrom morning to night. It was wonderful to watch him at his work, andmore wonderful still to hear his runs and trills. He was in fact happierthan the Seven Sages.This merry soul had a neighbour who was exactly the reverse. He sanglittle and slept less; for he was a financier, and made of money, asthey say. Whenever it happened that after a sleepless night he woulddoze off in the early morning, the cobbler, who was always up betimes,would wake him up again with his joyful songs. "Ha!" thought the man ofwealth, "what a misfortune it is that one cannot buy sleep in the openmarket as one buys food and drink!" Then an idea came to him. Heinvited the cobbler to his house, where he asked him some questions."Tell me, Master Gregory, what do you suppose your earnings amount to ina year?""In a year," laughed the cobbler, "that's more than I know. I never keepaccounts that way, nor even keep one day from another. So long as I canmake both ends meet, that's good enough for me!""Really!" replied the financier. "But what can you earn in one day?""Oh, sometimes more and sometimes less. The mischief of it is that thereare so many fête days and high-days and fast-days crowded into the year,on which, as the priest tells us, it is wicked to work at all; and worsestill he keeps on finding some new saint or other to give weight to hissermons. If it were not for that, cobbling would be a fine paying game."At this the wealthy man laughed. "Look here, my friend, to-day I'll liftyou to the seats of the mighty! Here is a hundred pounds. Guard them anduse them with care."When the cobbler held the bag of money in his hand he imagined that itmust be as much as would be coined in a hundred years.Returning home he buried the cash in his cellar. Alas! he buried his joywith it, for there were no more songs. From the moment he came intopossession of this wealth, the love of which is the root of all evil,his voice left him, and not only his voice, but his sleep also. And inplace of these came anxiety, suspicion, and alarms; guests which abodewith him constantly. All day he kept his eye on the cellar door. Did acat make a noise in the night, then for a certainty that cat was afterhis money.At last, in despair, the wretched cobbler ran to the financier whom henow no longer kept awake. "Oh, give me back my joy in life, my songs, mysleep; and take your hundred pounds again."