Story Title: The Animals Sick of the Plague
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8424
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

One of those dread evils which spread terror far and wide, andwhich Heaven, in its anger, ordains for the punishment of wickednessupon earth—a plague in fact; and so dire a one as to make rich in oneday that grim ferryman who takes a coin from all who cross the riverAcheron to the land of the dead—such a plague was once waging waragainst the animals. All were attacked, although all did not die. Sohopeless was the case that not one of them attempted to sustain theirsinking lives. Even the sight of food did not rouse them. Wolves andfoxes no longer turned eager and calculating eyes upon their gentle andguileless prey. The turtle-doves went no more in cooing pairs, but werecontent to avoid each other. Love and the joy that comes of love wereboth at an end.At length the lion called a council of all the beasts and addressed themin these words: "My dear friends, it seems to me that it is for our sinsthat Heaven has permitted this misfortune to fall upon us. Would it notbe well if the most blameworthy among us allowed himself to be offeredas a sacrifice to appease the celestial wrath? By so doing he mightsecure our recovery. History tells us that this course is usuallypursued in such cases as ours. Let us look into our consciences withoutself-deception or condoning. For my own part, I freely admit that inorder to satisfy my gluttony I have devoured an appalling number ofsheep; and yet what had they done to me to deserve such a fate? Nothingthat could be called an offence. Sometimes, indeed, I have gone so faras to eat the shepherd too! On the whole, I think I had better rendermyself for this act of sacrifice; that is, if we agree that it is athing necessary to the general good. And yet I think it would be onlyfair that every one should declare his sins as well as I; for I couldwish that, in justice, it were the most culpable that should perish.""Sire," said the fox, "you are really too yielding for a king, and yourscruples show too much delicacy of feeling. Eating sheep indeed! What ofthat?—a foolish and rascally tribe! Is that a crime? No! a hundredtimes no! On the contrary your noble jaws did but do them great honour.As for the shepherd, it may be fairly said that all the harm he got hemerited, since he was one of those who fancy they have dominion over theanimal kingdom." Thus spake the fox and every other flatterer in theassembly applauded him. Nor did any seek to inquire deeply into theleast pardonable offences of the tiger, the bear, and the other mightyones. All those of an aggressive nature, right down to the simplewatch-dog, were something like saints in their own opinions.When the ass stood forth in his turn he struck a different note: nothingof fangs and talons and blood. "I remember," he said, "that once inpassing a field belonging to a monastery I was urged by hunger, byopportunity, by the tenderness of the grass, and perhaps by the evil oneegging me on, to enter and crop just a taste, about as much as thelength of my tongue. I know that I did wrong, having really no rightthere."At these words all the assembly turned upon him. The wolf took uponhimself to make a speech proving without doubt that the ass was anaccursed wretch, a mangy brute, who certainly ought to be told off forsacrifice, since through his wickedness all their misfortunes had comeabout. His peccadillo was judged to be a hanging matter. "What! eat thegrass belonging to another? How abominable a crime! Nothing but deathcould expiate such an outrage!" And forthwith they proved as much to thepoor ass.Accordingly as your power is great or small, the judgments of a courtwill whiten or blacken your reputation.