Story Title: The Dog Who Carried his Master's Dinner
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8435
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

Our hands are no more proof against gold than our eyes areproof against beauty. There are but few who guard their treasures withcare enough.A certain dog who had been taught to carry to his master the mid-daymeal was one day trotting along with the savoury burden slung around hisneck. He was tempted to take a taste himself; but knew that it would bewrong to do so, and being a temperate, self-governed dog he refrained.We of the human race allow ourselves to be tempted by covetable thingsoften enough; but, strange as it is, there seems to be more difficultyin teaching mankind to resist temptation than there is in teaching dogsto do so.On this particular day the dog was met by a mastiff who at once wantedthe dinner, but did not find it so easy to capture as he thought; forour dog put it down and stood guard over it. There was a mighty tussle.Soon others arrived; curs that were used to knocks and kicks whilepicking up a living in the streets. Seeing that he should be badlyover-matched, and that his master's dinner was in danger of beingdevoured by the crowd, he bethought himself how he too might have hisshare, if shared it must be. So he very wisely exclaimed, "No fighting,gentlemen, my bit will suffice me. Do as you please with the rest." Withthese words he snapped up a portion, upon which all the rest began topull and jostle to their utmost and feasted merrily.In this I seem to see the picture of one of those unfortunate towns orstates which occasionally have suffered from the greed of theirministers and officials. Each functionary has an eye to his ownadvantage, and the smartest sets a pattern for the others. The way inwhich the public funds disappear is amusing. If one sheriff or provost,having a scruple of conscience, finds a trifling argument in defence ofthe public interest the others show him that he is a fool if he uttershalf a word. So, with a very little trouble, he gives way, and oftenbecomes the leading offender.