Story Title: The Lion, the Monkey, and the Two Asses
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8449
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

King Lion, thinking that he would govern better if he took afew lessons in moral philosophy, had a monkey brought to him one fineday who was a master of arts in the monkey tribe. The first lesson hegave was as follows:—"Great King, in order to govern wisely a prince should always considerthe good of the country before yielding to that feeling which iscommonly known as self-love, for that fault is the father of all thevices one sees in animals. To rid oneself of this sentiment is not aneasy thing to do, and is not to be done in a day. Indeed, merely tomoderate it is to achieve a good deal, and if you succeed so far youwill never tolerate in yourself anything ridiculous or unjust.""Give me," commanded the king, "an example of each of those faults.""Every species of creature," continued the philosopher, "esteems itselfin its heart above all the others. These others it regards asignoramuses, calling them by many hard names which, after all, hurtnobody. At the same time this self-love, which sneers at other tribesand other kinds of beasts, induces the individual to heap praise uponother individuals of his own species, because that is a very good way ofpraising oneself too. From this it is easy to see that many talents herebelow are in reality but empty pretence, assumption, and pose, and acertain gift of making the most of oneself, better understood byignorant people than by learned."The other day I followed two asses who were offering the incense offlattery to each other by turns, and heard one say, 'My Lord, do you notthink that man, that perfect animal, is both unjust and stupid? Heprofanes our august name by calling every one of his own kind an ass whois ignorant, or dull, or idiotic; and he calls our laughter and ourdiscourse by the term "braying." It is very amusing that these humanpeople pretend to excel us!'"'My friend,' said his companion, 'it is for you to speak, and for themto hold their tongues. They are the true brayers. But let us speak nomore of them. We two understand each other; that is sufficient. And asfor the marvels of delight your divine voice lets fall upon our ears,the nightingale herself is but a novice in comparison. You surpass thecourt musician.'"To this the other donkey replied, 'My lord, I admire in you exactly thesame excellencies.'"Not content with flattering each other in this way, these two asseswent about the cities singing aloud each other's praises. Either onethought he was doing a good turn to himself in thus lauding hiscompanion."Well, your majesty, I know of many people to-day, not among asses, butamong exalted creatures, whom heaven has been pleased to raise to a highdegree, who would, if they dared, change their title of 'Excellency tothat of 'Majesty.' I am saying more than I should, perhaps, and I hopeyour majesty will keep the secret. You wished to hear of some incidentwhich would show you, among other things, how self-love makes peopleridiculous, and there I have given you a good instance. Injustice I willspeak of another time, it would take too long now."Thus spoke the ape. No one has ever been able to tell me whether he everdid speak of injustice to his king. It would have been a delicatematter, and our master of arts, who was no fool, regarded the lion astoo terrible a king to submit to being lectured too far.