Story Title: The Horoscope
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8437
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

Our destiny is frequently met in the very paths we take toavoid it.A father had an only son whom he loved excessively. His devotedaffection caused him to be so anxious as to the boy's welfare that hesought to learn from astrologers and fortune-tellers what fate was instore for the son and heir. One of these soothsayers told him that anespecial danger lay with lions, from which the youth must be guardeduntil the age of twenty was reached, but not after. The father, to makesure of this precaution, upon the issue of which depended the life ofhis loved one, commanded that by no chance should the boy ever bepermitted to go beyond the threshold of the house. Ample provision wasmade for the satisfaction of all the wishes proper to youth in the wayof play with his companions, jumping, running, walking, and so forth. Asthe age approached when the spirits of youth yearn for the chase, he wastaught to hold that sport in abhorrence.But temperament cannot be changed by persuasion and counsel, nor byenlightenment. The young man, eager, ardent, and full of courage, nosooner felt the promptings of his years than he sighed for theforbidden pleasures. The greater the hindrance the stronger the desire.Knowing the reason of his galling restrictions, and viewing day by dayin his palatial home the hunting scenes pictured in paint and tapestryon every wall, his excitement became unrestrained.Once his eye fell upon a pictured lion. "Ah! Monster!" he exclaimed in atransport of indignation. "It is to you that the shade and fetters inwhich I live are due!" With that he struck the lion's form a heavy blowwith his fist. Hidden under the tapestry a great nail offered its cruelpoint, and upon this his hand was impaled. The wound grew beyond thereach of medical skill, and in the end this life, so guarded andcherished, was lost by means of the very care taken to preserve it.The same jealous precaution proved fatal to the poet Æschylus. It issaid that some fortune-teller menaced him with the fall of a house ashis doom, upon which he at once left the town and made his bed in theopen fields, far from roofs and beneath the sky. But an eagle flew byoverhead carrying in its talons a tortoise, and seeing the bald head ofthe poet beneath, which it mistook for a stone, the bird let fall itsprey in order to break the shell of the tortoise. Thus were the days ofpoor Æschylus ended.From these two examples it would seem that this art of fortune-telling,if there be any truth in it, causes one to fall into the very evil onewould be in dread of when one consulted it. But I will demonstrate andmaintain that the art is false. I do not believe that Nature would havetied her own hands, and ours also, to the extent of marking our fate inthe heavens. For our fate depends upon certain combinations of time,place, and people; not upon the combinations of charlatans. A shepherdand a king are born under the same planet: one carries the sceptre; theother the crook. The planet Jupiter willed it so! But what is thisplanet Jupiter? A body without senses. Whence comes it then that itsinfluence works so differently on these two men? Further, how could itsinfluence, if it had any, penetrate through endless voids to our world?