Story Title: The Maiden
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8427
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

A certain damsel of considerable pride made up her mind tochoose a husband who should be young, well-built, and handsome; ofagreeable manners and—note these two points—neither cold nor jealous.Moreover, she held it necessary that he should have means, high birth,intellect; in fact, everything. But whoever was endowed with everything?The fates were evidently anxious to do their best for her, for they senther some most noteworthy suitors. But these the proud beauty found nothalf good enough. "What, men like those! You propose them for me! Whythey are pitiable! Look at them—fine types, indeed!" According to herone was a dullard; another's nose was impossible. With this it was onething; with that it was another; for superior people are disdainfulabove all things.After these eligible gentlemen had been dismissed, came others of lessworth, and at these too she mocked. "Why," said she, "I would not bemeanmyself to open the door to such. They must think me very anxious to bemarried. Thank Heaven my single state causes me no regrets."The maiden contented herself with such notions until advancing age madeher step down from her pedestal. Adieu then to all suitors. One yearpassed and then another. Her anxiety increased, and after anger camegrief. She felt that those little smiles and glances which, at thebidding of love, lurk in the countenances of fair maidens were day byday deserting her. Finally, when love himself departed, her featuresgave pleasure to none. Then she had recourse to those hundred littleruses and tricks of the toilet to repair the ravages of time; butnothing that she could do arrested the depredations of that despicablethief. One may repair a house gone to ruin: but the same thing is notpossible with a face!Her refined ladyship now sang to a different tune, for her mirroradvised her to take a husband without delay. Perhaps also her heartharboured the wish. Even superior persons may have longings! This one atlast made a choice that people would at one time have thoughtimpossible; for she was very pleased and happy in marrying an uglycripple.