Story Title: The League of Rats
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8459
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

There was once a mouse who lived in terrible fear of a cat thathad lain in wait watching for her. She was in great anxiety to know whatshe could do to escape the threatening danger.Being prudent and wise she consulted her neighbour, a large andimportant rat. His lordship the rat had taken up his abode in a verygood inn, and had boasted a hundred times that he had no fear for eithertom-cat or she-cat. Neither teeth nor claws caused him any anxiousthought."Dame Mouse," said this boaster, "whatever I do, I cannot, upon my word,chase away this cat that threatens you without some help. But let mecall together all the rats hereabouts and I'll play him a sorry trick ortwo."The mouse curtsied humbly her thanks and the rat ran with speed to thehead-quarters; that is to say to the larder, where the rats were in thehabit of assembling. Arriving out of breath and perturbed in mind hefound them making a great feast at the expense of their host."What ails you?" asked one of the feasters. "Speak!""In two words," answered he, "the reason for my coming among you inthis way is simply that it has become absolutely necessary to help themice; for Grimalkin is abroad making terrible slaughter among them.This, the most devilish of cats, will, when she has no mice left, turnher attention to the eating of rats.""He says what is true," cried they all. "To arms, to arms!" Nothingcould stem the tide of their impetuosity; although, it is said, a fewshe-rats shed tears. It was no matter. Every one overhauled hisequipment, and filled his wallet with cheese. To risk life was thedetermination of all. They set off, as if to a fête, with happy mindsand joyful hearts.Alas, for the mouse! These warriors were a moment too late. The cat hadher already by the head. Advancing at the double the rats ran to thesuccour of their good little friend; but the cat swore, and stalked awayin front of the enemy, having no intention of surrendering her prey.At the sound of the cat's defiance, the prudent rats, fearing ill fate,beat a safe retreat without carrying any further their intendedonslaught. Each one ran to his hole, and whenever any ventured out againit was always with the utmost caution to avoid the cat.