Story Title: The Rabbits
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8447
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

When I have noticed how man acts at times, and how, in athousand ways, he comports himself just as the lower animals do, I haveoften said to myself that the lord of these lower orders has no fewerfaults than his subjects.Nature has allowed every living thing a drop or two from the fount atwhich the spirits of all creatures imbibe.I will prove what I say.If at the hour when night has scarcely passed and day hardly begun Iclimb into a tree, on the edge of some wood, and, like a new Jupiterfrom the heights of Olympus, I send a shot at some unsuspecting rabbit,then the whole colony of rabbits, who were enjoying their thyme-scentedmeal with open eyes and listening ears upon the heath, immediatelyscamper away. The report sends them all to seek refuge in theirsubterranean city.But their great fright is soon over; the danger quickly forgotten. AgainI see the rabbits more light-hearted than ever coming close under mydeath-dealing hand.Does not this give us a picture of mankind? Dispersed by some storm, menno sooner reach a haven than they are ready again to risk the same windsand the same distress. True rabbits, they run again into thedeath-dealing hands of fortune.Let us add to this example another of a more ordinary kind.When strange dogs pass through any spot beyond their customary routethere is a grand to-do. I leave you to picture it. All the dogs of thedistrict with one idea in their heads join forces, barking and biting,to chase the intruder beyond the bounds of their territory.So, it may be, a similar joint-interest in property or in glory andgrandeur leads such people as the governors of states, certain favouredcourtiers, and people of a trade to behave exactly like these jealousdogs. All of us, as a rule, rob the chance-comer and tear him to pieces.Vain ladies and men of letters are usually so disposed. Woe betide thenewly-arrived beauty or a new writer!As few as possible fighting round the cake! That's the best way!I could bring a hundred examples to bear upon this subject; but theshorter a discourse is the better. I take the masters of literature formy model in this and hold that in the best of themes something should beleft unsaid for the reader to consider about. Therefore this discourseshall end.