Story Title: The Dairy-woman and the Pail of Milk
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8429
ATU Classification Number: UNKNOWN

A young country woman named Perrette set out one morning fromher little dairy-farm with a pail of milk which she cleverly balancedupon her head over a pad or cushion. She hurried with sprightly steps tothe market town, and so that she might be the less encumbered, wore akirtle that was short and light—in truth a simple petticoat—and shoeslow and easy. As she went, her thoughts ran upon the price to be gainedfor her milk, and she schemed a way to lay out the sum in the purchaseof one hundred eggs. She was sure that with care and diligence thesewould yield three broods. "It would be quite easy to me," she said, "toraise the chicks near the house. The fox would be clever who would notleave me enough to buy one pig. A pig would fatten at the cost of alittle bran, and when he had grown a fair size I should make a bargainof him for a good round sum. And then, considering the price he willfetch, what is to prevent my putting into our stable a cow and a calf? Ican fancy how the calf will frisk about among the sheep!" ThereuponPerrette herself frisked for joy, transported with the picture of heraffluence. Over toppled the milk! Adieu to calf and cow and pig andbroods! This lady of wealth had to leave, with tearful eyes, herdissipated fortunes, and go straight to her husband framing excuses toavoid a beating.Overtoppled the milk.The farce became known to the whole countryside, and people calledPerrette by the name of "Milkpail" ever after.Who has never talked wildly? Who has never built castles in Spain? Wisemen as well as milkmaids; sages and fools, all have waking dreams andfind them sweet! Our senses are carried away by some flatteringfalsehood, and then wealth, honours, and beauty seem ours to command.Alone with my thoughts I challenge the bravest. I dethrone monarchs andthe people rejoicing crown me instead, showering diadems upon my head.Then lo! a little accident happens to bring me back to my senses, and Iam Poor Jack as before.