Story Title: The Spider and the Turtle
Story ID (from ATU-website): 8977
ATU Classification Number: 60

One day Anansi the spider picked some very fat and tasty vegetables from his garden. He baked them with much care and they came out smelling delicious. He could not wait to sit down and eat them. Just then there was a knock at his door. It was Turtle, who had been traveling all day and was very tired and hungry. "Hello, Anansi," said Turtle. "I have been walking for so long, and I smelt the most delicious vegetables I have ever smelt. Would you be so kind as to share your meal with me?"Anansi could not refuse, for it was the custom in his country to share your meal with visitors at mealtime. But he was not very happy, for Anansi was a little too greedy and wanted the delicious vegetables all to himself. So Anansi thought for a while and came up with a scheme. "Please do come in, Turtle. I would be honored to have you as my guest this evening. Sit down, grab a chair and help yourself. "Turtle came inside and sat down, but just as he reached for a vegetable, Anansi yelled, "Turtle, don't you know better than to come to the table with dirty hands?"Turtle looked down at his hands and saw that they were filthy. He had been crawling all day and had not had a chance to clean up. Turtle got up and went to the river to clean his feet. He walked, slowly like all turtles, all the way back up to the house, and when he returned, Anansi had already begun to eat. "I didn't want these tasty vegetables to get cold, so I had to begin," said Anansi. "But please do join me now, Turtle. "Turtle sat down again and reached for a vegetable, but again Anansi yelled at him. "Turtle, did you not hear me before? It is not polite to come to the table with dirty hands!"He looked down and saw that his clean hands had turned dirty once more, since he had to crawl on them to get back to the house. So he walked down to the river once more to wash himself. And when he returned this time, he was careful to walk on the grass so his hands would stay clean. But by the time he sat down at the table, Anansi had finished up the tasty vegetables and not a single bit was left. Turtle looked at Anansi for a moment and then said, "Thank you for sharing your meal with me. If you ever find yourself near my house, please let me return the favour. "And then he slowly walked out the door and continued his way. The days went by and Anansi thought more and more of that meal that Turtle had offered. He got more and more interested in a free dinner and finally could not stand it anymore. He set off one day to find Turtle's house. He found Turtle sunning himself on a riverbank just around dinnertime. Turtle looked up and said, "Hello, Anansi, have you come to share an evening meal with me?""Oh yes, yes!" said Anansi, who was growing hungrier and hungrier by the minute. Turtle went underwater to his house to set the dinner table for dinner. Soon he came back to the bank and said, "Your place is waiting and the food is ready. Please join me, Anansi. "And then he dived underwater and began to slowly eat his meal. Anansi jumped into the water, but could not get down to the bottom of the river. He tried to swim down, but he was so light that he kept popping back up to the surface. He tried diving, and he tried a backcrawl. He tried a running jump, but nothing would help him get down to the river bottom. In the meantime, Turtle was slowly eating his meal. Anansi was not about to give up a free meal, and went to the riverside wondering what he would do. Finally he had an idea. He started grabbing stones and rocks and stuffed them into his jacket pockets. Now when he jumped into the water he sank right down to the bottom and was able to take his place at the table. The table was a beautiful banquet full of delicious foods. Anansi could hardly believe how many tasty food was before him and could not wait to start. But just as he reached for the first morsel, Turtle stopped eating and said: "In my country, we do not wear our jackets to the table. "Anansi noticed that Turtle had removed his own jacket before sitting down. Anansi started to remove his jacket, and as soon as it was off of his shoulders, he went straight back up to the surface. He stuck his head down into the water and saw Turtle, down there, slowly enjoying that wonderful banquet. 