hill and vale do not come together , but the children of men do , good and bad .
in this way a shoemaker and a tailor once met with each other in their travels .
the tailor was a handsome little fellow who was always merry and full of enjoyment .
he saw the shoemaker coming towards him from the other side , and as he observed by his bag what kind of a trade he plied , he sang a little mocking song to him , " sew me the seam , draw me the thread , spread it over with pitch , knock the nail on the head ."
the shoemaker , however , could not endure a joke ; he pulled a face as if he had drunk vinegar , and made a gesture as if he were about to seize the tailor by the throat .
but the little fellow began to laugh , reached him his bottle , and said , " no harm was meant , take a drink , and swallow your anger down ."
the shoemaker took a very hearty drink , and the storm on his face began to clear away .
he gave the bottle back to the tailor , and said , " i spoke civilly to you ; one speaks well after much drinking , but not after much thirst .
shall we travel together ?"
- " all right ," answered the tailor , " if only it suits you to go into a big town where there is no lack of work ."
- " that is just where i want to go ," answered the shoemaker .
" in a small nest there is nothing to earn , and in the country , people like to go barefoot ."
they travelled therefore onwards together , and always set one foot before the other like a weasel in the snow . both of them had time enough , but little to bite and to break .
when they reached a town they went about and paid their respects to the tradesmen , and because the tailor looked so lively and merry , and had such pretty red cheeks , every one gave him work willingly , and when luck was good the master ' s daughters gave him a kiss beneath the porch , as well .
when he again fell in with the shoemaker , the tailor had always the most in his bundle .
the ill - tempered shoemaker made a wry face , and thought , " the greater the rascal the more the luck ," but the tailor began to laugh and to sing , and shared all he got with his comrade .
if a couple of pence jingled in his pockets , he ordered good cheer , and thumped the table in his joy till the glasses danced , and it was lightly come , lightly go , with him . when they had travelled for some time , they came to a great forest through which passed the road to the capital .
two foot - paths , however , led through it , one of which was a seven days ' journey , and the other only two , but neither of the travellers knew which way was the short one .
they seated themselves beneath an oak - tree , and took counsel together how they should forecast , and for how many days they should provide themselves with bread .
the shoemaker said , " one must look before one leaps , i will take with me bread for a week ."
- " what !"
said the tailor , " drag bread for seven days on one ' s back like a beast of burden , and not be able to look about .
i shall trust in god , and not trouble myself about anything !
the money i have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter , but in hot weather bread gets dry , and mouldy into the bargain ; even my coat does not go as far as it might .
besides , why should we not find the right way ?
bread for two days , and that ' s enough ."
each , therefore , bought his own bread , and then they tried their luck in the forest . it was as quiet there as in a church .
no wind stirred , no brook murmured , no bird sang , and through the thickly - leaved branches no sunbeam forced its way .
the shoemaker spoke never a word , the heavy bread weighed down his back until the perspiration streamed down his cross and gloomy face .
the tailor , however , was quite merry , he jumped about , whistled on a leaf , or sang a song , and thought to himself , " god in heaven must be pleased to see me so happy .
" this lasted two days , but on the third the forest would not come to an end , and the tailor had eaten up all his bread , so after all his heart sank down a yard deeper .
in the meantime he did not lose courage , but relied on god and on his luck .
on the third day he lay down in the evening hungry under a tree , and rose again next morning hungry still ; so also passed the fourth day , and when the shoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner , the tailor was only a looker - on .
if he begged for a little piece of bread the other laughed mockingly , and said , " thou hast always been so merry , now thou canst try for once what it is to be sad : the birds which sing too early in the morning are struck by the hawk in the evening ," in short he was pitiless .
but on the fifth morning the poor tailor could no longer stand up , and was hardly able to utter one word for weakness ; his cheeks were white , and his eyes red .
then the shoemaker said to him , " i will give thee a bit of bread to - day , but in return for it , i will put out thy right eye ."
the unhappy tailor who still wished to save his life , could not do it in any other way ; he wept once more with both eyes , and then held them out , and the shoemaker , who had a heart of stone , put out his right eye with a sharp knife .
the tailor called to remembrance what his mother had formerly said to him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry .
" eat what one can , and suffer what one must ."
when he had consumed his dearly - bought bread , he got on his legs again , forgot his misery and comforted himself with the thought that he could always see enough with one eye .
but on the sixth day , hunger made itself felt again , and gnawed him almost to the heart .
in the evening he fell down by a tree , and on the seventh morning he could not raise himself up for faintness , and death was close at hand .
then said the shoemaker , " i will show mercy and give thee bread once more , but thou shalt not have it for nothing , i shall put out thy other eye for it ."
and now the tailor felt how thoughtless his life had been , prayed to god for forgiveness , and said , " do what thou wilt , i will bear what i must , but remember that our lord god does not always look on passively , and that an hour will come when the evil deed which thou hast done to me , and which i have not deserved of thee , will be requited .
when times were good with me , i shared what i had with thee .
my trade is of that kind that each stitch must always be exactly like the other .
if i no longer have my eyes and can sew no more i must go a - begging .
at any rate do not leave me here alone when i am blind , or i shall die of hunger ."
the shoemaker , however , who had driven god out of his heart , took the knife and put out his left eye .
then he gave him a bit of bread to eat , held out a stick to him , and drew him on behind him . when the sun went down , they got out of the forest , and before them in the open country stood the gallows .
thither the shoemaker guided the blind tailor , and then left him alone and went his way .
weariness , pain , and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep , and he slept the whole night .
when day dawned he awoke , but knew not where he lay .
two poor sinners were hanging on the gallows , and a crow sat on the head of each of them .
then one of the men who had been hanged began to speak , and said , " brother , art thou awake ?"
- " yes , i am awake ," answered the second .
" then i will tell thee something ," said the first ; " the dew which this night has fallen down over us from the gallows , gives every one who washes himself with it his eyes again .
if blind people did but know this , how many would regain their sight who do not believe that to be possible .
" when the tailor heard that , he took his pocket - handkerchief , pressed it on the grass , and when it was moist with dew , washed the sockets of his eyes with it .
immediately was fulfilled what the man on the gallows had said , and a couple of healthy new eyes filled the sockets .
it was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise behind the mountains ; in the plain before him lay the great royal city with its magnificent gates and hundred towers , and the golden balls and crosses which were on the spires began to shine .
he could distinguish every leaf on the trees , saw the birds which flew past , and the midges which danced in the air .
he took a needle out of his pocket , and as he could thread it as well as ever he had done , his heart danced with delight .
he threw himself on his knees , thanked god for the mercy he had shown him , and said his morning prayer .
he did not forget also to pray for the poor sinners who were hanging there swinging against each other in the wind like the pendulums of clocks .
then he took his bundle on his back and soon forgot the pain of heart he had endured , and went on his way singing and whistling . the first thing he met was a brown foal running about the fields at large .
he caught it by the mane , and wanted to spring on it and ride into the town .
the foal , however , begged to be set free .
" i am still too young ," it said , " even a light tailor such as thou art would break my back in two let me go till i have grown strong .
a time may perhaps come when i may reward thee for it ."
- " run off ," said the tailor , " i see thou art still a giddy thing ."
he gave it a touch with a switch over its back , whereupon it kicked up its hind legs for joy , leapt over hedges and ditches , and galloped away into the open country . but the little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before .
" the sun to be sure fills my eyes ," said he , " but the bread does not fill my mouth .
the first thing that comes across me and is even half edible will have to suffer for it ."
in the meantime a stork stepped solemnly over the meadow towards him .
" halt , halt !"
cried the tailor , and seized him by the leg .
" i don ' t know if thou art good to eat or not , but my hunger leaves me no great choice .
i must cut thy head off , and roast thee ."
- " don ' t do that ," replied the stork ; " i am a sacred bird which brings mankind great profit , and no one does me an injury .
leave me my life , and i may do thee good in some other way ."
- " well , be off , cousin longlegs ," said the tailor .
the stork rose up , let its long legs hang down , and flew gently away .
" what ' s to be the end of this ?"
said the tailor to himself at last , " my hunger grows greater and greater , and my stomach more and more empty .
whatsoever comes in my way now is lost ."
at this moment he saw a couple of young ducks which were on a pond come swimming towards him .
" you come just at the right moment ," said he , and laid hold of one of them and was about to wring its neck .
on this an old duck which was hidden among the reeds , began to scream loudly , and swam to him with open beak , and begged him urgently to spare her dear children .
" canst thou not imagine ," said she , " how thy mother would mourn if any one wanted to carry thee off , and give thee thy finishing stroke ?"
- " only be quiet ," said the good - tempered tailor , " thou shalt keep thy children ," and put the prisoner back into the water . when he turned round , he was standing in front of an old tree which was partly hollow , and saw some wild bees flying in and out of it .
" there i shall at once find the reward of my good deed ," said the tailor , " the honey will refresh me ."
but the queen - bee came out , threatened him and said , " if thou touchest my people , and destroyest my nest , our stings shall pierce thy skin like ten thousand red - hot needles .
but if thou wilt leave us in peace and go thy way , we will do thee a service for it another time .
" the little tailor saw that here also nothing was to be done .
" three dishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a bad dinner !"
he dragged himself therefore with his starved - out stomach into the town , and as it was just striking twelve , all was ready - cooked for him in the inn , and he was able to sit down at once to dinner .
when he was satisfied he said , " now i will get to work ."
he went round the town , sought a master , and soon found a good situation .
as , however , he had thoroughly learnt his trade , it was not long before he became famous , and every one wanted to have his new coat made by the little tailor , whose importance increased daily .
" i can go no further in skill ," said he , " and yet things improve every day ."
at last the king appointed him court - tailor . but how things do happen in the world !
on the very same day his former comrade the shoemaker also became court - shoemaker .
when the latter caught sight of the tailor , and saw that he had once more two healthy eyes , his conscience troubled him .
" before he takes revenge on me ," thought he to himself , " i must dig a pit for him ."
he , however , who digs a pit for another , falls into it himself .
in the evening when work was over and it had grown dusk , he stole to the king and said , " lord king , the tailor is an arrogant fellow and has boasted that he will get the gold crown back again which was lost in ancient times ."
- " that would please me very much ," said the king , and he caused the tailor to be brought before him next morning , and ordered him to get the crown back again , or to leave the town for ever .
" oho !"
thought the tailor , " a rogue gives more than he has got .
if the surly king wants me to do what can be done by no one , i will not wait till morning , but will go out of the town at once , to - day ."
he packed up his bundle , therefore , but when he was without the gate he could not help being sorry to give up his good fortune , and turn his back on the town in which all had gone so well with him .
he came to the pond where he had made the acquaintance of the ducks ; at that very moment the old one whose young ones he had spared , was sitting there by the shore , pluming herself with her beak .
she knew him again instantly , and asked why he was hanging his head so ?
" thou wilt not be surprised when thou hearest what has befallen me ," replied the tailor , and told her his fate .
" if that be all ," said the duck , " we can help thee .
the crown fell into the water , and lies down below at the bottom ; we will soon bring it up again for thee .
in the meantime just spread out thy handkerchief on the bank ."
she dived down with her twelve young ones , and in five minutes she was up again and sat with the crown resting on her wings , and the twelve young ones were swimming round about and had put their beaks under it , and were helping to carry it .
they swam to the shore and put the crown on the handkerchief .
no one can imagine how magnificent the crown was ; when the sun shone on it , it gleamed like a hundred thousand carbuncles .
the tailor tied his handkerchief together by the four corners , and carried it to the king , who was full of joy , and put a gold chain round the tailor ' s neck . when the shoemaker saw that one stroke had failed , he contrived a second , and went to the king and said , " lord king , the tailor has become insolent again ; he boasts that he will copy in wax the whole of the royal palace , with everything that pertains to it , loose or fast , inside and out ."
the king sent for the tailor and ordered him to copy in wax the whole of the royal palace , with everything that pertained to it , movable or immovable , within and without , and if he did not succeed in doing this , or if so much as one nail on the wall were wanting , he should be imprisoned for his whole life under ground . the tailor thought , " it gets worse and worse !
no one can endure that ?"
and threw his bundle on his back , and went forth .
when he came to the hollow tree , he sat down and hung his head .
the bees came flying out , and the queen - bee asked him if he had a stiff neck , since he held his head so awry ?
" alas , no ," answered the tailor , " something quite different weighs me down ," and he told her what the king had demanded of him .
the bees began to buzz and hum amongst themselves , and the queen - bee said , " just go home again , but come back to - morrow at this time , and bring a large sheet with you , and then all will be well ."
so he turned back again , but the bees flew to the royal palace and straight into it through the open windows , crept round about into every corner , and inspected everything most carefully .
then they hurried back and modelled the palace in wax with such rapidity that any one looking on would have thought it was growing before his eyes .
by the evening all was ready , and when the tailor came next morning , the whole of the splendid building was there , and not one nail in the wall or tile of the roof was wanting , and it was delicate withal , and white as snow , and smelt sweet as honey .
the tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it to the king , who could not admire it enough , placed it in his largest hall , and in return for it presented the tailor with a large stone house . the shoemaker , however , did not give up , but went for the third time to the king and said , " lord king , it has come to the tailor ' s ears that no water will spring up in the court - yard of the castle , and he has boasted that it shall rise up in the midst of the court - yard to a man ' s height and be clear as crystal ."
then the king ordered the tailor to be brought before him and said , " if a stream of water does not rise in my court - yard by to - morrow as thou hast promised , the executioner shall in that very place make thee shorter by the head ."
the poor tailor did not take long to think about it , but hurried out to the gate , and because this time it was a matter of life and death to him , tears rolled down his face .
whilst he was thus going forth full of sorrow , the foal to which he had formerly given its liberty , and which had now become a beautiful chestnut horse , came leaping towards him .
" the time has come ," it said to the tailor , " when i can repay thee for thy good deed .
i know already what is needful to thee , but thou shalt soon have help ; get on me , my back can carry two such as thou ."
the tailor ' s courage came back to him ; he jumped up in one bound , and the horse went full speed into the town , and right up to the court - yard of the castle .
it galloped as quick as lightning thrice round it , and at the third time it fell violently down .
at the same instant , however , there was a terrific clap of thunder , a fragment of earth in the middle of the court - yard sprang like a cannon - ball into the air , and over the castle , and directly after it a jet of water rose as high as a man on horseback , and the water was as pure as crystal , and the sunbeams began to dance on it .
when the king saw that he arose in amazement , and went and embraced the tailor in the sight of all men . but good fortune did not last long .
the king had daughters in plenty , one still prettier than the other , but he had no son .
so the malicious shoemaker betook himself for the fourth time to the king , and said , " lord king , the tailor has not given up his arrogance .
he has now boasted that if he liked , he could cause a son to be brought to the lord king through the air ."
the king commanded the tailor to be summoned , and said , " if thou causest a son to be brought to me within nine days , thou shalt have my eldest daughter to wife ."
- " the reward is indeed great ," thought the little tailor ; " one would willingly do something for it , but the cherries grow too high for me , if i climb for them , the bough will break beneath me , and i shall fall .
" he went home , seated himself cross - legged on his work - table , and thought over what was to be done .
" it can ' t be managed ," cried he at last , " i will go away ; after all i can ' t live in peace here ."
he tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate .
when he got to the meadow , he perceived his old friend the stork , who was walking backwards and forwards like a philosopher .
sometimes he stood still , took a frog into close consideration , and at length swallowed it down .
the stork came to him and greeted him .
" i see ," he began , " that thou hast thy pack on thy back .
why art thou leaving the town ?"
the tailor told him what the king had required of him , and how he could not perform it , and lamented his misfortune .
" don ' t let thy hair grow grey about that ," said the stork , " i will help thee out of thy difficulty .
for a long time now , i have carried the children in swaddling - clothes into the town , so for once in a way i can fetch a little prince out of the well .
go home and be easy .
in nine days from this time repair to the royal palace , and there will i come ."
the little tailor went home , and at the appointed time was at the castle .
it was not long before the stork came flying thither and tapped at the window .
the tailor opened it , and cousin longlegs came carefully in , and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble pavement .
he had , moreover , a baby in his beak that was as lovely as an angel , and stretched out its little hands to the queen .
the stork laid it in her lap , and she caressed it and kissed it , and was beside herself with delight .
before the stork flew away , he took his travelling bag off his back and handed it over to the queen .
in it there were little paper parcels with colored sweetmeats , and they were divided amongst the little princesses .
the eldest , however , had none of them , but got the merry tailor for a husband .
" it seems to me ," said he , " just as if i had won the highest prize .
my mother was if right after all , she always said that whoever trusts in god and only has good luck , can never fail .
" the shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor danced at the wedding festival , after which he was commanded to quit the town for ever .
the road to the forest led him to the gallows .
worn out with anger , rage , and the heat of the day , he threw himself down .
when he had closed his eyes and was about to sleep , the two crows flew down from the heads of the men who were hanging there , and pecked his eyes out .
in his madness he ran into the forest and must have died there of hunger , for no one has ever either seen him again or heard of him .
