there was once a countryman who had money and land in plenty , but how rich soever he was , one thing was still wanting in his happiness he had no children .
often when he went into the town with the other peasants they mocked him and asked why he had no children .
at last he became angry , and when he got home he said , " i will have a child , even if it be a hedgehog ."
then his wife had a child , that was a hedgehog in the upper part of his body , and a boy in the lower , and when she saw the child , she was terrified , and said , " see , there thou hast brought ill - luck on us ."
then said the man , " what can be done now ?
the boy must be christened , but we shall not be able to get a godfather for him ."
the woman said , " and we cannot call him anything else but hans - my - hedgehog ."
when he was christened , the parson said , " he cannot go into any ordinary bed because of his spikes ."
so a little straw was put behind the stove , and hans - my - hedgehog was laid on it .
his mother could not suckle him , for he would have pricked her with his quills .
so he lay there behind the stove for eight years , and his father was tired of him and thought , " if he would but die !"
he did not die , however , but remained lying there .
now it happened that there was a fair in the town , and the peasant was about to go to it , and asked his wife what he should bring back with him for her .
" a little meat and a couple of white rolls which are wanted for the house ," said she .
then he asked the servant , and she wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings with clocks .
at last he said also , " and what wilt thou have , hans my hedgehog ?"
- " dear father ," he said , " do bring me bagpipes ."
when , therefore , the father came home again , he gave his wife what he had bought for her ; meat and white rolls , and then he gave the maid the slippers , and the stockings with clocks ; and , lastly , he went behind the stove , and gave hans - my - hedgehog the bagpipes .
and when hans - my - hedgehog had the bagpipes , he said , " dear father , do go to the forge and get the cock shod , and then i will ride away , and never come back again ."
on this , the father was delighted to think that he was going to get rid of him , and had the cock shod for him , and when it was done , hans - my - hedgehog got on it , and rode away , but took swine and asses with him which he intended to keep in the forest .
when they got there he made the cock fly on to a high tree with him , and there he sat for many a long year , and watched his asses and swine until the herd was quite large , and his father knew nothing about him .
while he was sitting in the tree , however , he played his bagpipes , and made music which was very beautiful .
once a king came travelling by who had lost his way and heard the music .
he was astonished at it , and sent his servant forth to look all round and see from whence this music came .
he spied about , but saw nothing but a little animal sitting up aloft on the tree , which looked like a cock with a hedgehog on it which made this music .
then the king told the servant he was to ask why he sat there , and if he knew the road which led to his kingdom .
so hans - my - hedgehog descended from the tree , and said he would show the way if the king would write a bond and promise him whatever he first met in the royal courtyard as soon as he arrived at home .
then the king thought , " i can easily do that , hans - my - hedgehog understands nothing , and i can write what i like ."
so the king took pen and ink and wrote something , and when he had done it , hans - my - hedgehog showed him the way , and he got safely home .
but his daughter , when she saw him from afar , was so overjoyed that she ran to meet him , and kissed him .
then he remembered hans - my - hedgehog , and told her what had happened , and that he had been forced to promise whatsoever first met him when he got home , to a very strange animal which sat on a cock as if it were a horse , and made beautiful music , but that instead of writing that he should have what he wanted , he had written that he should not have it .
thereupon the princess was glad , and said he had done well , for she never would have gone away with the hedgehog . hans - my - hedgehog , however , looked after his asses and pigs , and was always merry and sat on the tree and played his bagpipes .
now it came to pass that another king came journeying by with his attendants and runners , and he also had lost his way , and did not know how to get home again because the forest was so large .
he likewise heard the beautiful music from a distance , and asked his runner what that could be , and told him to go and see .
then the runner went under the tree , and saw the cock sitting at the top of it , and hans - my - hedgehog on the cock .
the runner asked him what he was about up there ?
" i am keeping my asses and my pigs ; but what is your desire ?"
the messenger said that they had lost their way , and could not get back into their own kingdom , and asked if he would not show them the way .
then hans - my - hedgehog got down the tree with the cock , and told the aged king that he would show him the way , if he would give him for his own whatsoever first met him in front of his royal palace .
the king said , " yes ," and wrote a promise to hans - my - hedgehog that he should have this .
that done , hans rode on before him on the cock , and pointed out the way , and the king reached his kingdom again in safety .
when he got to the courtyard , there were great rejoicings .
now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful ; she ran to meet him , threw her arms round his neck , and was delighted to have her old father back again .
she asked him where in the world he had been so long .
so he told her how he had lost his way , and had very nearly not come back at all , but that as he was travelling through a great forest , a creature , half hedgehog , half man , who was sitting astride a cock in a high tree , and making music , had shown him the way and helped him to get out , but that in return he had promised him whatsoever first met him in the royal court - yard , and how that was she herself , which made him unhappy now .
but on this she promised that , for love of her father , she would willingly go with this hans if he came . hans - my - hedgehog , however , took care of his pigs , and the pigs multiplied until they became so many in number that the whole forest was filled with them .
then hans - my - hedgehog resolved not to live in the forest any longer , and sent word to his father to have every stye in the village emptied , for he was coming with such a great herd that all might kill who wished to do so .
when his father heard that , he was troubled , for he thought hans - my - hedgehog had died long ago .
hans - my - hedgehog , however , seated himself on the cock , and drove the pigs before him into the village , and ordered the slaughter to begin .
ha !
but there was a killing and a chopping that might have been heard two miles off !
after this hans - my - hedgehog said , " father , let me have the cock shod once more at the forge , and then i will ride away and never come back as long as i live ."
then the father had the cock shod once more , and was pleased that hans - my - hedgehog would never return again . hans - my - hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom .
there the king had commanded that whosoever came mounted on a cock and had bagpipes with him should be shot at , cut down , or stabbed by everyone , so that he might not enter the palace .
when , therefore , hans - my - hedgehog came riding thither , they all pressed forward against him with their pikes , but he spurred the cock and it flew up over the gate in front of the king ' s window and lighted there , and hans cried that the king must give him what he had promised , or he would take both his life and his daughter ' s .
then the king began to speak his daughter fair , and to beg her to go away with hans in order to save her own life and her father ' s .
so she dressed herself in white , and her father gave her a carriage with six horses and magnificent attendants together with gold and possessions .
she seated herself in the carriage , and placed hans - my - hedgehog beside her with the cock and the bagpipes , and then they took leave and drove away , and the king thought he should never see her again .
he was however , deceived in his expectation , for when they were at a short distance from the town , hans - my - hedgehog took her pretty clothes off , and pierced her with his hedgehog ' s skin until she bled all over .
" that is the reward of your falseness ," said he .
" go your way , i will not have you !"
and on that he chased her home again , and she was disgraced for the rest of her life . hans - my - hedgehog , however , rode on further on the cock , with his bagpipes , to the dominions of the second king to whom he had shown the way .
this one , however , had arranged that if any one resembling hans - my - hedgehog should come , they were to present arms , give him safe conduct , cry long life to him , and lead him to the royal palace .
but when the king ' s daughter saw him she was terrified , for he looked quite too strange .
she remembered however , that she could not change her mind , for she had given her promise to her father .
so hans - my - hedgehog was welcomed by her , and married to her , and had to go with her to the royal table , and she seated herself by his side , and they ate and drank .
when the evening came and they wanted to go to sleep , she was afraid of his quills , but he told her she was not to fear , for no harm would befall her , and he told the old king that he was to appoint four men to watch by the door of the chamber , and light a great fire , and when he entered the room and was about to get into bed , he would creep out of his hedgehog ' s skin and leave it lying there by the bedside , and that the men were to run nimbly to it , throw it in the fire , and stay by it until it was consumed .
when the clock struck eleven , he went into the chamber , stripped off the hedgehog ' s skin , and left it lying by the bed .
then came the men and fetched it swiftly , and threw it in the fire ; and when the fire had consumed it , he was delivered , and lay there in bed in human form , but he was coal - black as if he had been burnt .
the king sent for his physician who washed him with precious salves , and anointed him , and he became white , and was a handsome young man .
when the king ' s daughter saw that she was glad , and the next morning they arose joyfully , ate and drank , and then the marriage was properly solemnized , and hans - my - hedgehog received the kingdom from the aged king . when several years had passed he went with his wife to his father , and said that he was his son .
the father , however , declared he had no son he had never had but one , and he had been born like a hedgehog with spikes , and had gone forth into the world .
then hans made himself known , and the old father rejoiced and went with him to his kingdom .
