there was once on a time a soldier who for many years had served the king faithfully , but when the war came to an end could serve no longer because of the many wounds which he had received .
the king said to him , " thou mayst return to thy home , i need thee no longer , and thou wilt not receive any more money , for he only receives wages who renders me service for them ."
then the soldier did not know how to earn a living , went away greatly troubled , and walked the whole day , until in the evening he entered a forest .
when darkness came on , he saw a light , which he went up to , and came to a house wherein lived a witch .
" do give me one night ' s lodging , and a little to eat and drink ," said he to her , " or i shall starve ."
- " oho !"
she answered , " who gives anything to a run - away soldier ?
yet will i be compassionate , and take you in , if you will do what i wish ."
- " what do you wish ?"
said the soldier .
" that you should dig all round my garden for me , tomorrow ."
the soldier consented , and next day labored with all his strength , but could not finish it by the evening .
" i see well enough ," said the witch , " that you can do no more to - day , but i will keep you yet another night , in payment for which you must to - morrow chop me a load of wood , and make it small ."
the soldier spent the whole day in doing it , and in the evening the witch proposed that he should stay one night more .
" to - morrow , you shall only do me a very trifling piece of work .
behind my house , there is an old dry well , into which my light has fallen , it burns blue , and never goes out , and you shall bring it up again for me ."
next day the old woman took him to the well , and let him down in a basket .
he found the blue light , and made her a signal to draw him up again .
she did draw him up , but when he came near the edge , she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the blue light away from him .
" no ," said he , perceiving her evil intention , " i will not give thee the light until i am standing with both feet upon the ground ."
the witch fell into a passion , let him down again into the well , and went away . the poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground , and the blue light went on burning , but of what use was that to him ?
he saw very well that he could not escape death .
he sat for a while very sorrowfully , then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe , which was still half full .
" this shall be my last pleasure ," thought he , pulled it out , lit it at the blue light and began to smoke .
when the smoke had circled about the cavern , suddenly a little black dwarf stood before him , and said , " lord , what are thy commands ?"
- " what commands have i to give thee ?"
replied the soldier , quite astonished .
" i must do everything thou biddest me ," said the little man .
" good ," said the soldier ; " then in the first place help me out of this well ."
the little man took him by the hand , and led him through an underground passage , but he did not forget to take the blue light with him .
on the way the dwarf showed him the treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there , and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry .
when he was above , he said to the little man , " now go and bind the old witch , and carry her before the judge ."
in a short time she , with frightful cries , came riding by , as swift as the wind on a wild tom - cat , nor was it long after that before the little man re - appeared .
" it is all done ," said he , " and the witch is already hanging on the gallows .
what further commands has my lord ?"
inquired the dwarf .
" at this moment , none ," answered the soldier ; " thou canst return home , only be at hand immediately , if i summon thee ."
- " nothing more is needed than that thou shouldst light thy pipe at the blue light , and i will appear before thee at once ."
thereupon he vanished from his sight . the soldier returned to the town from which he had come .
he went to the best inn , ordered himself handsome clothes , and then bade the landlord furnish him a room as handsomely as possible .
when it was ready and the soldier had taken possession of it , he summoned the little black mannikin and said , " i have served the king faithfully , but he has dismissed me , and left me to hunger , and now i want to take my revenge ."
- " what am i to do ?"
asked the little man .
" late at night , when the king ' s daughter is in bed , bring her here in her sleep , she shall do servant ' s work for me ."
the mannikin said , " that is an easy thing for me to do , but a very dangerous thing for you , for if it is discovered , you will fare ill ." when twelve o ' clock had struck , the door sprang open , and the mannikin carried in the princess .
" aha !
art thou there ?"
cried the soldier , " get to thy work at once !
fetch the broom and sweep the chamber ."
when she had done this , he ordered her to come to his chair , and then he stretched out his feet and said , " pull off my boots for me ," and then he threw them in her face , and made her pick them up again , and clean and brighten them .
she , however , did everything he bade her , without opposition , silently and with half - shut eyes .
when the first cock crowed , the mannikin carried her back to the royal palace , and laid her in her bed . next morning when the princess arose , she went to her father , and told him that she had had a very strange dream .
" i was carried through the streets with the rapidity of lightning ," said she , " and taken into a soldier ' s room , and i had to wait upon him like a servant , sweep his room , clean his boots , and do all kinds of menial work .
it was only a dream , and yet i am just as tired as if i really had done everything ."
- " the dream may have been true ," said the king , " i will give thee a piece of advice .
fill thy pocket full of peas , and make a small hole in it , and then if thou art carried away again , they will fall out and leave a track in the streets ."
but unseen by the king , the mannikin was standing beside him when he said that , and heard all .
at night when the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets , some peas certainly did fall out of her pocket , but they made no track , for the crafty mannikin had just before scattered peas in every street there was .
and again the princess was compelled to do servant ' s work until cock - crow . next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track , but it was all in vain , for in every street poor children were sitting , picking up peas , and saying , " it must have rained peas , last night ."
- " we must think of something else ," said the king ; " keep thy shoes on when thou goest to bed , and before thou comest back from the place where thou art taken , hide one of them there , i will soon contrive to find it ."
the black mannikin heard this plot , and at night when the soldier again ordered him to bring the princess , revealed it to him , and told him that he knew of no expedient to counteract this stratagem , and that if the shoe were found in the soldier ' s house it would go badly with him .
" do what i bid thee ," replied the soldier , and again this third night the princess was obliged to work like a servant , but before she went away , she hid her shoe under the bed . next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter ' s shoe .
it was found at the soldier ' s , and the soldier himself , who at the entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate , was soon brought back , and thrown into prison .
in his flight he had forgotten the most valuable things he had , the blue light and the gold , and had only one ducat in his pocket .
and now loaded with chains , he was standing at the window of his dungeon , when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by .
the soldier tapped at the pane of glass , and when this man came up , said to him , " be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle i have left lying in the inn , and i will give you a ducat for doing it ."
his comrade ran thither and brought him what he wanted .
as soon as the soldier was alone again , he lighted his pipe and summoned the black mannikin .
" have no fear ," said the latter to his master .
" go wheresoever they take you , and let them do what they will , only take the blue light with you ."
next day the soldier was tried , and though he had done nothing wicked , the judge condemned him to death .
when he was led forth to die , he begged a last favor of the king .
" what is it ?"
asked the king .
" that i may smoke one more pipe on my way ."
- " thou mayst smoke three ," answered the king , " but do not imagine that i will spare thy life ."
then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lighted it at the blue light , and as soon as a few wreaths of smoke had ascended , the mannikin was there with a small cudgel in his hand , and said , " what does my lord command ?"
- " strike down to earth that false judge there , and his constable , and spare not the king who has treated me so ill ." then the mannikin fell on them like lightning , darting this way and that way , and whosoever was so much as touched by his cudgel fell to earth , and did not venture to stir again .
the king was terrified ; he threw himself on the soldier ' s mercy , and merely to be allowed to live at all , gave him his kingdom for his own , and the princess to wife .
