seven swabians were once together .
the first was master schulz ; the second , jackli ; the third , marli ; the fourth , jergli ; the fifth , michal ; the sixth , hans ; the seventh , veitli : all seven had made up their minds to travel about the world to seek adventures , and perform great deeds .
but in order that they might go in security and with arms in their hands , they thought it would be advisable that they should have one solitary , but very strong , and very long spear made for them .
this spear all seven of them took in their hands at once ; in front walked the boldest and bravest , and that was master schulz ; all the others followed in a row , and veitli was the last .
then it came to pass one day in the hay - making month ( july ), when they had walked a long distance , and still had a long way to go before they reached the village where they were to pass the night , that as they were in a meadow in the twilight a great beetle or hornet flew by them from behind a bush , and hummed in a menacing manner .
master schulz was so terrified that he all but dropped the spear , and a cold perspiration broke out over his whole body .
" hark !
hark !"
cried he to his comrades , " good heavens !
i hear a drum ."
jackli , who was behind him holding the spear , and who perceived some kind of a smell , said , " something is most certainly going on , for i taste powder and matches ."
at these words master schulz began to take to flight , and in a trice jumped over a hedge , but as he just happened to jump on to the teeth of a rake which had been left lying there after the hay - making , the handle of it struck against his face and gave him a tremendous blow .
" oh dear !
oh dear !"
screamed master schulz .
" take me prisoner ; i surrender !
i surrender !"
the other six all leapt over , one on the top of the other , crying , " if you surrender , i surrender too !
if you surrender , i surrender too !"
at length , as no enemy was there to bind and take them away , they saw that they had been mistaken , and in order that the story might not be known , and they be treated as fools and ridiculed , they all swore to each other to hold their peace about it until one of them accidentally spoke of it .
then they journeyed onwards .
the second danger which they survived cannot be compared with the first .
some days afterwards , their path led them through a fallow - field where a hare was sitting sleeping in the sun .
her ears were standing straight up , and her great glassy eyes were wide open .
all of them were alarmed at the sight of the horrible wild beast , and they consulted together as to what it would be the least dangerous to do .
for if they were to run away , they knew that the monster would pursue and swallow them whole .
so they said , " we must go through a great and dangerous struggle .
boldly ventured , is half won ," and all seven grasped the spear , master schulz in front , and veitli behind .
master schulz was always trying to keep the spear back , but veitli had become quite brave while behind , and wanted to dash forward and cried , " strike home , in every swabian ' s name , or else i wish ye may be lame .
" but hans knew how to meet this , and said ," thunder and lightning , it ' s fine to prate , but for dragon - hunting thou ' rt aye too late .
" michal cried ," nothing is wanting , not even a hair , be sure the devil himself is there .
" then it was jergli ' s turn to speak ," if it be not , it ' s at least his mother , or else it ' s the devil ' s own step - brother .
" and now marli had a bright thought , and said to veitli ," advance , veitli , advance , advance , and i behind will hold the lance .
" veitli , however , did not attend to that , and jackli said ," tis schulz ' s place the first to be , no one deserves that honor but he .
" then master schulz plucked up his courage , and said , gravely ," then let us boldly advance to the fight , and thus we shall show our valour and might .
" hereupon they all together set on the dragon .
master schulz crossed himself and prayed for god ' s assistance , but as all this was of no avail , and he was getting nearer and nearer to the enemy , he screamed " oho !
oho !
ho !
ho !
ho !"
in the greatest anguish .
this awakened the hare , which in great alarm darted swiftly away .
when master schulz saw her thus flying from the field of battle , he cried in his joy .
" quick , veitli , quick , look there , look there , the monster ' s nothing but a hare !
" but the swabian allies went in search of further adventures , and came to the moselle , a mossy , quiet , deep river , over which there are few bridges , and which in many places people have to cross in boats .
as the seven swabians did not know this , they called to a man who was working on the opposite side of the river , to know how people contrived to get across .
the distance and their way of speaking made the man unable to understand what they wanted , and he said " what ?
what ?"
in the way people speak in the neighborhood of treves .
master schulz thought he was saying , " wade , wade through the water ," and as he was the first , began to set out and went into the moselle .
it was not long before he sank in the mud and the deep waves which drove against him , but his hat was blown on the opposite shore by the wind , and a frog sat down beside it , and croaked " wat , wat , wat ."
the other six on the opposite side heard that , and said , " oho , comrades , master schulz is calling us ; if he can wade across , why cannot we ?"
so they all jumped into the water together in a great hurry , and were drowned , and thus one frog took the lives of all six of them , and not one of the swabian allies ever reached home again .
