there was once a young huntsman who went into the forest to lie in wait .
he had a fresh and joyous heart , and as he was going thither , whistling upon a leaf , an ugly old crone came up , who spoke to him and said , " good - day , dear huntsman , truly you are merry and contented , but i am suffering from hunger and thirst , do give me an alms ."
the huntsman had compassion on the poor old creature , felt in his pocket , and gave her what he could afford .
he was then about to go further , but the old woman stopped him and said , " listen , dear huntsman , to what i tell you ; i will make you a present in return for your kindness .
go on your way now , but in a little while you will come to a tree , whereon nine birds are sitting which have a cloak in their claws , and are plucking at it ; take your gun and shoot into the midst of them , they will let the cloak fall down to you , but one of the birds will be hurt , and will drop down dead .
carry away the cloak , it is a wishing - cloak ; when you throw it over your shoulders , you only have to wish to be in a certain place , and you will be there in the twinkling of an eye .
take out the heart of the dead bird and swallow it whole , and every morning early , when you get up , you will find a gold piece under your pillow ."
the huntsman thanked the wise woman , and thought to himself , " those are fine things that she has promised me , if all does but come true ."
and verily when he had walked about a hundred paces , he heard in the branches above him such a screaming and twittering that he looked up and saw there a crowd of birds who were tearing a piece of cloth about with their beaks and claws , and tugging and fighting as if each wanted to have it all to himself .
" well ," said the huntsman , " this is wonderful , it has really come to pass just as the old wife foretold !"
and he took the gun from his shoulder , aimed and fired right into the midst of them , so that the feathers flew about .
the birds instantly took to flight with loud outcries , but one dropped down dead , and the cloak fell at the same time .
then the huntsman did as the old woman had directed him , cut open the bird , sought the heart , swallowed it down , and took the cloak home with him . next morning , when he awoke , the promise occurred to him , and he wished to see if it also had been fulfilled .
when he lifted up the pillow , the gold piece shone in his eyes , and next day he found another , and so it went on , every time he got up .
he gathered together a heap of gold , but at last he thought , " of what use is all my gold to me if i stay at home ?
i will go forth and see the world .
" he then took leave of his parents , buckled on his huntsman ' s pouch and gun , and went out into the world .
it came to pass , that one day he travelled through a dense forest , and when he came to the end of it , in the plain before him stood a fine castle .
an old woman was standing with a wonderfully beautiful maiden , looking out of one of the windows .
the old woman , however , was a witch and said to the maiden , " there comes one out of the forest , who has a wonderful treasure in his body , we must filch it from him , my dear daughter , it is more suitable for us than for him .
he has a bird ' s heart about him , by means of which a gold piece lies every morning under his pillow ."
she told her what she was to do to get it , and what part she had to play , and finally threatened her , and said with angry eyes , " and if you do not attend to what i say , it will be the worse for you ."
now when the huntsman came nearer he descried the maiden , and said to himself , " i have travelled about for such a long time , i will take a rest for once , and enter that beautiful castle .
i have certainly money enough ."
nevertheless , the real reason was that he had caught sight of the pretty girl . he entered the house , and was well received and courteously entertained .
before long he was so much in love with the young witch that he no longer thought of anything else , and only saw things as she saw them , and did what she desired .
the old woman then said , " now we must have the bird ' s heart , he will never miss it ."
she prepared a drink , and when it was ready , poured it into a cup and gave it to the maiden , who was to present it to the huntsman .
she did so , saying , " now , my dearest , drink to me ."
so he took the cup , and when he had swallowed the draught , he brought up the heart of the bird .
the girl had to take it away secretly and swallow it herself , for the old woman would have it so .
thenceforward he found no more gold under his pillow , but it lay instead under that of the maiden , from whence the old woman fetched it away every morning ; but he was so much in love and so befooled , that he thought of nothing else but of passing his time with the girl . then the old witch said , " we have the bird ' s heart , but we must also take the wishing - cloak away from him ."
the girl answered , " we will leave him that , he has lost his wealth ."
the old woman was angry and said , " such a mantle is a wonderful thing , and is seldom to be found in this world .
i must and will have it !"
she gave the girl several blows , and said that if she did not obey , it should fare ill with her .
so she did the old woman ' s bidding , placed herself at the window and looked on the distant country , as if she were very sorrowful .
the huntsman asked , " why dost thou stand there so sorrowfully ?"
- " ah , my beloved ," was her answer , " over yonder lies the garnet mountain , where the precious stones grow .
i long for them so much that when i think of them , i feel quite sad , but who can get them ?
only the birds ; they fly and can reach them , but a man never ."
- " hast thou nothing else to complain of ?"
said the huntsman .
" i will soon remove that burden from thy heart ."
with that he drew her under his mantle , wished himself on the garnet mountain , and in the twinkling of an eye they were sitting on it together .
precious stones were glistening on every side so that it was a joy to see them , and together they gathered the finest and costliest of them .
now , the old woman had , through her sorceries , contrived that the eyes of the huntsman should become heavy .
he said to the maiden , " we will sit down and rest awhile , i am so tired that i can no longer stand on my feet ."
then they sat down , and he laid his head in her lap , and fell asleep .
when he was asleep , she unfastened the mantle from his shoulders , and wrapped herself in it , picked up the garnets and stones , and wished herself back at home with them . but when the huntsman had had his sleep out and awoke , and perceived that his sweetheart had betrayed him , and left him alone on the wild mountain , he said , " oh , what treachery there is in the world !"
and sat down there in care and sorrow , not knowing what to do .
but the mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous giants who dwelt thereon and lived their lives there , and he had not sat long before he saw three of them coming towards him , so he lay down as if he were sunk in a deep sleep .
then the giants came up , and the first kicked him with his foot and said , " what sort of an earth - worm is lying curled up here ?
the second said , " step upon him and kill him ."
but the third said , " that would indeed be worth your while ; just let him live , he cannot remain here ; and when he climbs higher , toward the summit of of the mountain , the clouds will lay hold of him and bear him away ."
so saying they passed by .
but the huntsman had paid heed to their words , and as soon as they were gone , he rose and climbed up to the summit of the mountain , and when he had sat there a while , a cloud floated towards him , caught him up , carried him away , and travelled about for a long time in the heavens .
then it sank lower , and let itself down on a great cabbage - garden , girt round by walls , so that he came softly to the ground on cabbages and vegetables . then the huntsman looked about him and said , " if i had but something to eat !
i am so hungry , and my hunger will increase in course of time ; but i see here neither apples nor pears , nor any other sort of fruit , everywhere nothing but cabbages ," but at length he thought , " at a pinch i can eat some of the leaves , they do not taste particularly good , but they will refresh me ."
with that he picked himself out a fine head of cabbage , and ate it , but scarcely had he swallowed a couple of mouthfuls than he felt very strange and quite different . four legs grew on him , a large head and two thick ears , and he saw with horror that he was changed into an ass .
still as his hunger increased every minute , and as the juicy leaves were suitable to his present nature , he went on eating with great zest .
at last he arrived at a different kind of cabbage , but as soon as he had swallowed it , he again felt a change , and reassumed his former human shape . then the huntsman lay down and slept off his fatigue .
when he awoke next morning , he broke off one head of the bad cabbages and another of the good ones , and thought to himself , " this shall help me to get my own again and punish treachery ."
then he took the cabbages with him , climbed over the wall , and went forth to seek for the castle of his sweetheart .
after wandering about for a couple of days he was lucky enough to find it again .
he dyed his face brown , so that his own mother would not have known him ; and begged for shelter : " i am so tired ," said he , " that i can go no further ."
the witch asked , " who are you , countryman , and what is your business ?"
- " i am a king ' s messenger , and was sent out to seek the most delicious salad which grows beneath the sun .
i have even been so fortunate as to find it , and am carrying it about with me ; but the heat of the sun is so intense that the delicate cabbage threatens to wither , and i do not know if i can carry it any further .
" when the old woman heard of the exquisite salad , she was greedy , and said , " dear countryman , let me just taste this wonderful salad ."
- " why not ?"
answered he , " i have brought two heads with me , and will give you one of them ," and he opened his pouch and handed her the bad cabbage .
the witch suspected nothing amiss , and her mouth watered so for this new dish that she herself went into the kitchen and dressed it .
when it was prepared she could not wait until it was set on the table , but took a couple of leaves at once , and put them in her mouth , but hardly had she swallowed them than she was deprived of her human shape , and she ran out into the courtyard in the form of an ass .
presently the maid - servant entered the kitchen , saw the salad standing there ready prepared , and was about to carry it up ; but on the way , according to habit , she was seized by the desire to taste , and she ate a couple of leaves .
instantly the magic power showed itself , and she likewise became an ass and ran out to the old woman , and the dish of salad fell to the ground .
meantime the messenger sat beside the beautiful girl , and as no one came with the salad and she also was longing for it , she said , " i don ' t know what has become of the salad ."
the huntsman thought , " the salad must have already taken effect ," and said , " i will go to the kitchen and inquire about it ."
as he went down he saw the two asses running about in the courtyard ; the salad , however , was lying on the ground .
" all right ," said he , " the two have taken their portion ," and he picked up the other leaves , laid them on the dish , and carried them to the maiden .
" i bring you the delicate food myself ," said he , " in order that you may not have to wait longer ."
then she ate of it , and was , like the others , immediately deprived of her human form , and ran out into the courtyard in the shape of an ass . after the huntsman had washed his face , so that the transformed ones could recognize him , he went down into the courtyard , and said , " now you shall receive the wages of your treachery ," and bound them together , all three with one rope , and drove them along until he came to a mill .
he knocked at the window , the miller put out his head , and asked what he wanted .
" i have three unmanageable beasts ," answered he , " which i don ' t want to keep any longer .
will you take them in , and give them food and stable room , and manage them as i tell you , and then i will pay you what you ask ."
the miller said , " why not ?
but how am i to manage them ?"
the huntsman then said that he was to give three beatings and one meal daily to the old donkey , and that was the witch ; one beating and three meals to the younger one , which was the servant - girl ; and to the youngest , which was the maiden , no beatings and three meals , for he could not bring himself to have the maiden beaten .
after that he went back into the castle , and found therein everything he needed . after a couple of days , the miller came and said he must inform him that the old ass which had received three beatings and only one meal daily was dead ; " the two others ," he continued , " are certainly not dead , and are fed three times daily , but they are so sad that they cannot last much longer ."
the huntsman was moved to pity , put away his anger , and told the miller to drive them back again to him .
and when they came , he gave them some of the good salad , so that they became human again .
the beautiful girl fell on her knees before him , and said , " ah , my beloved , forgive me for the evil i have done you ; my mother drove me to it ; it was done against my will , for i love you dearly .
your wishing - cloak hangs in a cupboard , and as for the bird ' s - heart i will take a vomiting potion ."
but he thought otherwise , and said , " keep it ; it is all the same , for i will take thee for my true wife ."
so the wedding was celebrated , and they lived happily together until their death .
