a poor servant - girl was once travelling with the family with which she was in service , through a great forest , and when they were in the midst of it , robbers came out of the thicket , and murdered all they found .
all perished together except the girl , who had jumped out of the carriage in a fright , and hidden herself behind a tree .
when the robbers had gone away with their booty , she came out and beheld the great disaster .
then she began to weep bitterly , and said , " what can a poor girl like me do now ?
i do not know how to get out of the forest , no human being lives in it , so i must certainly starve ."
she walked about and looked for a road , but could find none .
when it was evening she seated herself under a tree , gave herself into god ' s keeping , and resolved to sit waiting there and not go away , let what might happen .
when , however , she had sat there for a while , a white dove came flying to her with a little golden key in its mouth .
it put the little key in her hand , and said , " dost thou see that great tree , therein is a little lock , it opens with the tiny key , and there thou wilt find food enough , and suffer no more hunger ."
then she went to the tree and opened it , and found milk in a little dish , and white bread to break into it , so that she could eat her fill .
when she was satisfied , she said , " it is now the time when the hens at home go to roost , i am so tired i could go to bed too ."
then the dove flew to her again , and brought another golden key in its bill , and said , " open that tree there , and thou willt find a bed ."
so she opened it , and found a beautiful white bed , and she prayed god to protect her during the night , and lay down and slept .
in the morning the dove came for the third time , and again brought a little key , and said , " open that tree there , and thou wilt find clothes ."
and when she opened it , she found garments beset with gold and with jewels , more splendid than those of any king ' s daughter .
so she lived there for some time , and the dove came every day and provided her with all she needed , and it was a quiet good life . once , however , the dove came and said , " wilt thou do something for my sake ?"
- " with all my heart ," said the girl .
then said the little dove , " i will guide thee to a small house ; enter it , and inside it , an old woman will be sitting by the fire and will say , ' good - day .'
but on thy life give her no answer , let her do what she will , but pass by her on the right side ; further on , there is a door , which open , and thou wilt enter into a room where a quantity of rings of all kinds are lying , amongst which are some magnificent ones with shining stones ; leave them , however , where they are , and seek out a plain one , which must likewise be amongst them , and bring it here to me as quickly as thou canst ."
the girl went to the little house , and came to the door .
there sat an old woman who stared when she saw her , and said , " good - day my child ."
the girl gave her no answer , and opened the door .
" whither away ," cried the old woman , and seized her by the gown , and wanted to hold her fast , saying , " that is my house ; no one can go in there if i choose not to allow it ."
but the girl was silent , got away from her , and went straight into the room .
now there lay on the table an enormous quantity of rings , which gleamed and glittered before her eyes .
she turned them over and looked for the plain one , but could not find it .
while she was seeking , she saw the old woman and how she was stealing away , and wanting to get off with a bird - cage which she had in her hand .
so she went after her and took the cage out of her hand , and when she raised it up and looked into it , a bird was inside which had the plain ring in its bill .
then she took the ring , and ran quite joyously home with it , and thought the little white dove would come and get the ring , but it did not .
then she leant against a tree and determined to wait for the dove , and , as she thus stood , it seemed just as if the tree was soft and pliant , and was letting its branches down .
and suddenly the branches twined around her , and were two arms , and when she looked round , the tree was a handsome man , who embraced and kissed her heartily , and said , " thou hast delivered me from the power of the old woman , who is a wicked witch .
she had changed me into a tree , and every day for two hours i was a white dove , and so long as she possessed the ring i could not regain my human form ."
then his servants and his horses , who had likewise been changed into trees , were freed from the enchantment also , and stood beside him .
and he led them forth to his kingdom , for he was a king ' s son , and they married , and lived happily .
