there was once a man who had three sons , and nothing else in the world but the house in which he lived .
now each of the sons wished to have the house after his father ' s death ; but the father loved them all alike , and did not know what to do ; he did not wish to sell the house , because it had belonged to his forefathers , else he might have divided the money amongst them .
at last a plan came into his head , and he said to his sons , " go into the world , and try each of you to learn a trade , and , when you all come back , he who makes the best masterpiece shall have the house .
" the sons were well content with this , and the eldest determined to be a blacksmith , the second a barber , and the third a fencing - master .
they fixed a time when they should all come home again , and then each went his way . it chanced that they all found skilful masters , who taught them their trades well .
the blacksmith had to shoe the king ' s horses , and he thought to himself , " the house is mine , without doubt ."
the barber only shaved great people , and he too already looked upon the house as his own .
the fencing - master got many a blow , but he only bit his lip , and let nothing vex him ; " for ," said he to himself , " if you are afraid of a blow , you ' ll never win the house .
" when the appointed time had gone by , the three brothers came back home to their father ; but they did not know how to find the best opportunity for showing their skill , so they sat down and consulted together .
as they were sitting thus , all at once a hare came running across the field .
" ah , ha , just in time !"
said the barber .
so he took his basin and soap , and lathered away until the hare came up ; then he soaped and shaved off the hare ' s whiskers whilst he was running at the top of his speed , and did not even cut his skin or injure a hair on his body .
" well done !"
said the old man .
" your brothers will have to exert themselves wonderfully , or the house will be yours .
" soon after , up came a nobleman in his coach , dashing along at full speed .
" now you shall see what i can do , father ," said the blacksmith ; so away he ran after the coach , took all four shoes off the feet of one of the horses whilst he was galloping , and put him on four new shoes without stopping him .
" you are a fine fellow , and as clever as your brother ," said his father ; " i do not know to which i ought to give the house .
" then the third son said , " father , let me have my turn , if you please ;" and , as it was beginning to rain , he drew his sword , and flourished it backwards and forwards above his head so fast that not a drop fell upon him .
it rained still harder and harder , till at last it came down in torrents ; but he only flourished his sword faster and faster , and remained as dry as if he were sitting in a house .
when his father saw this he was amazed , and said , " this is the master - piece , the house is yours !
" his brothers were satisfied with this , as was agreed beforehand ; and , as they loved one another very much , they all three stayed together in the house , followed their trades , and , as they had learnt them so well and were so clever , they earned a great deal of money .
thus they lived together happily until they grew old ; and at last , when one of them fell sick and died , the two others grieved so sorely about it that they also fell ill , and soon after died .
and because they had been so clever , and had loved one another so much , they were all laid in the same grave .
