in the days when wishing was still of some use , a king ' s son was bewitched by an old witch , and shut up in an iron stove in a forest .
there he passed many years , and no one could deliver him .
then a king ' s daughter came into the forest , who had lost herself , and could not find her father ' s kingdom again .
after she had wandered about for nine days , she at length came to the iron stove .
then a voice came forth from it , and asked her , " whence comest thou , and whither goest , thou ?"
she answered , " i have lost my father ' s kingdom , and cannot get home again ."
then a voice inside the iron stove said , " i will help thee to get home again , and that indeed most swiftly , if thou wilt promise to do what i desire of thee .
i am the son of a far greater king than thy father , and i will marry thee .
" then was she afraid , and thought , " good heavens !
what can i do with an iron stove ?"
but as she much wished to get home to her father , she promised to do as he desired .
but he said , " thou shalt return here , and bring a knife with thee , and scrape a hole in the iron ."
then he gave her a companion who walked near her , but did not speak , but in two hours he took her home ; there was great joy in the castle when the king ' s daughter came home , and the old king fell on her neck and kissed her .
she , however , was sorely troubled , and said , " dear father , what i have suffered !
i should never have got home again from the great wild forest , if i had not come to an iron stove , but i have been forced to give my word that i will go back to it , set it free , and marry it ."
then the old king was so terrified that he all but fainted , for he had but this one daughter .
they therefore resolved they would send , in her place , the miller ' s daughter , who was very beautiful .
they took her there , gave her a knife , and said she was to scrape at the iron stove .
so she scraped at it for four - and - twenty hours , but could not bring off the least morsel of it .
when day dawned , a voice in the stove said , " it seems to me it is day outside ."
then she answered , " it seems so to me too ; i fancy i hear the noise of my father ' s mill .
"" so thou art a miller ' s daughter !
then go thy way at once , and let the king ' s daughter come here ."
then she went away at once , and told the old king that the man outside there , would have none of her he wanted the king ' s daughter .
they , however , still had a swine - herd ' s daughter , who was even prettier than the miller ' s daughter , and they determined to give her a piece of gold to go to the iron stove instead of the king ' s daughter .
so she was taken thither , and she also had to scrape for four - and - twenty hours .
she , however , made nothing of it .
when day broke , a voice inside the stove cried , " it seems to me it is day outside !"
then answered she , " so it seems to me also ; i fancy i hear my father ' s horn blowing .
"" then thou art a swine - herd ' s daughter !
go away at once , and tell the king ' s daughter to come , and tell her all must be done as promised , and if she does not come , everything in the kingdom shall be ruined and destroyed , and not one stone be left standing on another ."
when the king ' s daughter heard that she began to weep , but now there was nothing for it but to keep her promise .
so she took leave of her father , put a knife in her pocket , and went forth to the iron stove in the forest .
when she got there , she began to scrape , and the iron gave way , and when two hours were over , she had already scraped a small hole .
then she peeped in , and saw a youth so handsome , and so brilliant with gold and with precious jewels , that her very soul was delighted .
now , therefore , she went on scraping , and made the hole so large that he was able to get out .
then said he , " thou art mine , and i am thine ; thou art my bride , and hast released me ."
he wanted to take her away with him to his kingdom , but she entreated him to let her go once again to her father , and the king ' s son allowed her to do so , but she was not to say more to her father than three words , and then she was to come back again .
so she went home , but she spoke more than three words , and instantly the iron stove disappeared , and was taken far away over glass mountains and piercing swords ; but the king ' s son was set free , and no longer shut up in it .
after this she bade good - bye to her father , took some money with her , but not much , and went back to the great forest , and looked for the iron stove , but it was nowhere to be found .
for nine days she sought it , and then her hunger grew so great that she did not know what to do , for she could no longer live .
when it was evening , she seated herself in a small tree , and made up her mind to spend the night there , as she was afraid of wild beasts .
when midnight drew near she saw in the distance a small light , and thought , " ah , there i should be saved !"
she got down from the tree , and went towards the light , but on the way she prayed .
then she came to a little old house , and much grass had grown all about it , and a small heap of wood lay in front of it .
she thought , " ah , whither have i come ," and peeped in through the window , but she saw nothing inside but toads , big and little , except a table well covered with wine and roast meat , and the plates and glasses were of silver .
then she took courage , and knocked at the door .
the fat toad cried ," little green waiting - maid , waiting - maid with the limping leg , little dog of the limping leg , hop hither and thither , and quickly see who is without :" and a small toad came walking by and opened the door to her .
when she entered , they all bade her welcome , and she was forced to sit down .
they asked , " where hast thou come from , and whither art thou going ?"
then she related all that had befallen her , and how because she had transgressed the order which had been given her not to say more than three words , the stove , and the king ' s son also , had disappeared , and now she was about to seek him over hill and dale until she found him .
then the old fat one said ," little green waiting - maid , waiting - maid with the limping leg , little dog of the limping leg , hop hither and thither , and bring me the great box .
" then the little one went and brought the box .
after this they gave her meat and drink , and took her to a well - made bed , which felt like silk and velvet , and she laid herself therein , in god ' s name , and slept .
when morning came she arose , and the old toad gave her three needles out of the great box which she was to take with her ; they would be needed by her , for she had to cross a high glass mountain , and go over three piercing swords and a great lake .
if she did all this she would get her lover back again .
then she gave her three things , which she was to take the greatest care of , namely , three large needles , a plough - wheel , and three nuts .
with these she travelled onwards , and when she came to the glass mountain which was so slippery , she stuck the three needles first behind her feet and then before them , and so got over it , and when she was over it , she hid them in a place which she marked carefully .
after this she came to the three piercing swords , and then she seated herself on her plough - wheel , and rolled over them .
at last she arrived in front of a great lake , and when she had crossed it , she came to a large and beautiful castle .
she went and asked for a place ; she was a poor girl , she said , and would like to be hired .
she knew , however , that the king ' s son whom she had released from the iron stove in the great forest was in the castle .
then she was taken as a scullery - maid at low wages .
but , already the king ' s son had another maiden by his side whom he wanted to marry , for he thought that she had long been dead . in the evening , when she had washed up and was done , she felt in her pocket and found the three nuts which the old toad had given her .
she cracked one with her teeth , and was going to eat the kernel when lo and behold there was a stately royal garment in it !
but when the bride heard of this she came and asked for the dress , and wanted to buy it , and said , " it is not a dress for a servant - girl ."
but she said no , she would not sell it , but if the bride would grant her one thing she should have it , and that was , leave to sleep one night in her bridegroom ' s chamber .
the bride gave her permission because the dress was so pretty , and she had never had one like it .
when it was evening she said to her bridegroom , " that silly girl will sleep in thy room ."
- " if thou art willing so am i ," said he .
she , however , gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a sleeping - draught .
so the bridegroom and the scullery - maid went to sleep in the room , and he slept so soundly that she could not waken him . she wept the whole night and cried , " i set thee free when thou wert in an iron stove in the wild forest , i sought thee , and walked over a glass mountain , and three sharp swords , and a great lake before i found thee , and yet thou wilt not hear me !"
the servants sat by the chamber - door , and heard how she thus wept the whole night through , and in the morning they told it to their lord .
and the next evening when she had washed up , she opened the second nut , and a far more beautiful dress was within it , and when the bride beheld it , she wished to buy that also .
but the girl would not take money , and begged that she might once again sleep in the bridegroom ' s chamber .
the bride , however , gave him a sleeping - drink , and he slept so soundly that he could hear nothing .
but the scullery - maid wept the whole night long , and cried , " i set thee free when thou wert in an iron stove in the wild forest , i sought thee , and walked over a glass mountain , and over three sharp swords and a great lake before i found thee , and yet thou wilt not hear me !"
the servants sat by the chamber - door and heard her weeping the whole night through , and in the morning informed their lord of it .
and on the third evening , when she had washed up , she opened the third nut , and within it was a still more beautiful dress which was stiff with pure gold .
when the bride saw that she wanted to have it , but the maiden only gave it up on condition that she might for the third time sleep in the bridegroom ' s apartment .
the king ' s son was , however , on his guard , and threw the sleeping - draught away .
now , therefore , when she began to weep and to cry , " dearest love , i set thee free when thou wert in the iron stove in the terrible wild forest ," the king ' s son leapt up and said , " thou art the true one , thou art mine , and i am thine ."
thereupon , while it was still night , he got into a carriage with her , and they took away the false bride ' s clothes so that she could not get up .
when they came to the great lake , they sailed across it , and when they reached the three sharp - cutting swords they seated themselves on the plough - wheel , and when they got to the glass mountain they thrust the three needles in it , and so at length they got to the little old house ; but when they went inside that , it was a great castle , and the toads were all disenchanted , and were king ' s children , and full of happiness .
then the wedding was celebrated , and the king ' s son and the princess remained in the castle , which was much larger than the castles of their fathers .
as , however , the old king grieved at being left alone , they fetched him away , and brought him to live with them , and they had two kingdoms , and lived in happy wedlock . a mouse did run , this story is done .
