there was once a woman who had three daughters , the eldest of whom was called one - eye , because she had only one eye in the middle of her forehead , and the second , two - eyes , because she had two eyes like other folks , and the youngest , three - eyes , because she had three eyes ; and her third eye was also in the centre of her forehead .
however , as two - eyes saw just as other human beings did , her sisters and her mother could not endure her .
they said to her , " thou , with thy two eyes , art no better than the common people ; thou dost not belong to us !"
they pushed her about , and threw old clothes to her , and gave her nothing to eat but what they left , and did everything that they could to make her unhappy .
it came to pass that two - eyes had to go out into the fields and tend the goat , but she was still quite hungry , because her sisters had given her so little to eat .
so she sat down on a ridge and began to weep , and so bitterly that two streams ran down from her eyes .
and once when she looked up in her grief , a woman was standing beside her , who said , " why art thou weeping , little two - eyes ?"
two - eyes answered , " have i not reason to weep , when i have two eyes like other people , and my sisters and mother hate me for it , and push me from one corner to another , throw old clothes at me , and give me nothing to eat but the scraps they leave ?
to - day they have given me so little that i am still quite hungry ."
then the wise woman said , " wipe away thy tears , two - eyes , and i will tell thee something to stop thee ever suffering from hunger again ; just say to thy goat ," bleat , my little goat , bleat , cover the table with something to eat ," and then a clean well - spread little table will stand before thee , with the most delicious food upon it of which thou mayst eat as much as thou art inclined for , and when thou hast had enough , and hast no more need of the little table , just say ," bleat , bleat , my little goat , i pray , and take the table quite away ," and then it will vanish again from thy sight ."
hereupon the wise woman departed .
but two - eyes thought , " i must instantly make a trial , and see if what she said is true , for i am far too hungry ," and she said ," bleat , my little goat , bleat , cover the table with something to eat ," and scarcely had she spoken the words than a little table , covered with a white cloth , was standing there , and on it was a plate with a knife and fork , and a silver spoon ; and the most delicious food was there also , warm and smoking as if it had just come out of the kitchen .
then two - eyes said the shortest prayer she knew , " lord god , be with us always , amen ," and helped herself to some food , and enjoyed it .
and when she was satisfied , she said , as the wise woman had taught her ," bleat , bleat , my little goat , i pray , and take the table quite away ," and immediately the little table and everything on it was gone again .
" that is a delightful way of keeping house !"
thought two - eyes , and was quite glad and happy . in the evening , when she went home with her goat , she found a small earthenware dish with some food , which her sisters had set ready for her , but she did not touch it .
next day she again went out with her goat , and left the few bits of broken bread which had been handed to her , lying untouched .
the first and second time that she did this , her sisters did not remark it at all , but as it happened every time , they did observe it , and said , " there is something wrong about two - eyes , she always leaves her food untasted , and she used to eat up everything that was given her ; she must have discovered other ways of getting food ."
in order that they might learn the truth , they resolved to send one - eye with two - eyes when she went to drive her goat to the pasture , to observe what two - eyes did when she was there , and whether any one brought her anything to eat and drink .
so when two - eyes set out the next time , one - eye went to her and said , " i will go with you to the pasture , and see that the goat is well taken care of , and driven where there is food ."
but two - eyes knew what was in one - eye ' s mind , and drove the goat into high grass and said , " come , one - eye , we will sit down , and i will sing something to you ."
one - eye sat down and was tired with the unaccustomed walk and the heat of the sun , and two - eyes sang constantly ," one eye , wakest thou ? one eye , sleepest thou ?
" until one - eye shut her one eye , and fell asleep , and as soon as two - eyes saw that one - eye was fast asleep , and could discover nothing , she said ," bleat , my little goat , bleat , cover the table with something to eat ," and seated herself at her table , and ate and drank until she was satisfied , and then she again cried ," bleat , bleat , my little goat , i pray , and take the table quite away ," and in an instant all was gone .
two - eyes now awakened one - eye , and said , " one - eye , you want to take care of the goat , and go to sleep while you are doing it , and in the meantime the goat might run all over the world .
come , let us go home again ."
so they went home , and again two - eyes let her little dish stand untouched , and one - eye could not tell her mother why she would not eat it , and to excuse herself said , " i fell asleep when i was out .
" next day the mother said to three - eyes , " this time thou shalt go and observe if two - eyes eats anything when she is out , and if any one fetches her food and drink , for she must eat and drink in secret ."
so three - eyes went to two - eyes , and said , " i will go with you and see if the goat is taken proper care of , and driven where there is food ."
but two - eyes knew what was in three - eyes ' mind , and drove the goat into high grass and said , " we will sit down , and i will sing something to you , three - eyes ."
three - eyes sat down and was tired with the walk and with the heat of the sun , and two - eyes began the same song as before , and sang ," three eyes , are you waking ?
" but then , instead of singing ," three eyes , are you sleeping ?
" as she ought to have done , she thoughtlessly sang ," two eyes , are you sleeping ?
" and sang all the time ," three eyes , are you waking ? two eyes , are you sleeping ?
" then two of the eyes which three - eyes had , shut and fell asleep , but the third , as it had not been named in the song , did not sleep .
it is true that three - eyes shut it , but only in her cunning , to pretend it was asleep too , but it blinked , and could see everything very well .
and when two - eyes thought that three - eyes was fast asleep , she used her little charm ," bleat , my little goat , bleat , cover the table with something to eat ," and ate and drank as much as her heart desired , and then ordered the table to go away again ," bleat , bleat , my little goat , i pray , and take the table quite away ," and three - eyes had seen everything .
then two - eyes came to her , waked her and said , " have you been asleep , three - eyes ?
you are a good care - taker !
come , we will go home ."
and when they got home , two - eyes again did not eat , and three - eyes said to the mother , " now , i know why that high - minded thing there does not eat .
when she is out , she says to the goat ," bleat , my little goat , bleat , cover the table with something to eat ," and then a little table appears before her covered with the best of food , much better than any we have here , and when she has eaten all she wants , she says ," bleat , bleat , my little goat , i pray , and take the table quite away ," and all disappears .
i watched everything closely .
she put two of my eyes to sleep by using a certain form of words , but luckily the one in my forehead kept awake ."
then the envious mother cried , " dost thou want to fare better than we do ?
the desire shall pass away ," and she fetched a butcher ' s knife , and thrust it into the heart of the goat , which fell down dead . when two - eyes saw that , she went out full of trouble , seated herself on the ridge of grass at the edge of the field , and wept bitter tears .
suddenly the wise woman once more stood by her side , and said , " two - eyes , why art thou weeping ?"
- " have i not reason to weep ?"
she answered .
" the goat which covered the table for me every day when i spoke your charm , has been killed by my mother , and now i shall again have to bear hunger and want ."
the wise woman said , " two - eyes , i will give thee a piece of good advice ; ask thy sisters to give thee the entrails of the slaughtered goat , and bury them in the ground in front of the house , and thy fortune will be made ."
then she vanished , and two - eyes went home and said to her sisters , " dear sisters , do give me some part of my goat ; i don ' t wish for what is good , but give me the entrails ."
then they laughed and said , " if that ' s all you want , you can have it ."
so two - eyes took the entrails and buried them quietly in the evening , in front of the house - door , as the wise woman had counselled her to do . next morning , when they all awoke , and went to the house - door , there stood a strangely magnificent tree with leaves of silver , and fruit of gold hanging among them , so that in all the wide world there was nothing more beautiful or precious .
they did not know how the tree could have come there during the night , but two - eyes saw that it had grown up out of the entrails of the goat , for it was standing on the exact spot where she had buried them .
then the mother said to one - eye , " climb up , my child , and gather some of the fruit of the tree for us ."
one - eye climbed up , but when she was about to get hold of one of the golden apples , the branch escaped from her hands , and that happened each time , so that she could not pluck a single apple , let her do what she might .
then said the mother , " three - eyes , do you climb up ; you with your three eyes can look about you better than one - eye ."
one - eye slipped down , and three - eyes climbed up .
three - eyes was not more skilful , and might search as she liked , but the golden apples always escaped her .
at length the mother grew impatient , and climbed up herself , but could get hold of the fruit no better than one - eye and three - eyes , for she always clutched empty air .
then said two - eyes , " i will just go up , perhaps i may succeed better ."
the sisters cried , " you indeed , with your two eyes , what can you do ?"
but two - eyes climbed up , and the golden apples did get out of her way , but came into her hand of their own accord , so that she could pluck them one after the other , and brought a whole apronful down with her .
the mother took them away from her , and instead of treating poor two - eyes any better for this , she and one - eye and three - eyes were only envious , because two - eyes alone had been able to get the fruit , and they treated her still more cruelly . it so befell that once when they were all standing together by the tree , a young knight came up .
" quick , two - eyes ," cried the two sisters , " creep under this , and don ' t disgrace us !"
and with all speed they turned an empty barrel which was standing close by the tree over poor two - eyes , and they pushed the golden apples which she had been gathering , under it too .
when the knight came nearer he was a handsome lord , who stopped and admired the magnificent gold and silver tree , and said to the two sisters , " to whom does this fine tree belong ?
any one who would bestow one branch of it on me might in return for it ask whatsoever he desired ."
then one - eye and three - eyes replied that the tree belonged to them , and that they would give him a branch .
they both took great trouble , but they were not able to do it , for the branches and fruit both moved away from them every time .
then said the knight , " it is very strange that the tree should belong to you , and that you should still not be able to break a piece off ."
they again asserted that the tree was their property .
whilst they were saying so , two - eyes rolled out a couple of golden apples from under the barrel to the feet of the knight , for she was vexed with one - eye and three - eyes , for not speaking the truth .
when the knight saw the apples he was astonished , and asked where they came from .
one - eye and three - eyes answered that they had another sister , who was not allowed to show herself , for she had only two eyes like any common person .
the knight , however , desired to see her , and cried , " two - eyes , come forth ."
then two - eyes , quite comforted , came from beneath the barrel , and the knight was surprised at her great beauty , and said , " thou , two - eyes , canst certainly break off a branch from the tree for me ."
- " yes ," replied two - eyes , " that i certainly shall be able to do , for the tree belongs to me ."
and she climbed up , and with the greatest ease broke off a branch with beautiful silver leaves and golden fruit , and gave it to the knight .
then said the knight , " two - eyes , what shall i give thee for it ?"
- " alas !"
answered two - eyes , " i suffer from hunger and thirst , grief and want , from early morning till late night ; if you would take me with you , and deliver me from these things , i should be happy ."
so the knight lifted two - eyes on to his horse , and took her home with him to his father ' s castle , and there he gave her beautiful clothes , and meat and drink to her heart ' s content , and as he loved her so much he married her , and the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing .
when two - eyes was thus carried away by the handsome knight , her two sisters grudged her good fortune in downright earnest .
the wonderful tree , however , still remains with us ," thought they , " and even if we can gather no fruit from it , still every one will stand still and look at it , and come to us and admire it .
who knows what good things may be in store for us ?"
but next morning , the tree had vanished , and all their hopes were at an end .
and when two - eyes looked out of the window of her own little room , to her great delight it was standing in front of it , and so it had followed her . two - eyes lived a long time in happiness .
once two poor women came to her in her castle , and begged for alms .
she looked in their faces , and recognized her sisters , one - eye , and three - eyes , who had fallen into such poverty that they had to wander about and beg their bread from door to door .
two - eyes , however , made them welcome , and was kind to them , and took care of them , so that they both with all their hearts repented the evil that they had done their sister in their youth .
