there was once upon a time a king who had twelve daughters , each one more beautiful than the other .
they all slept together in one chamber , in which their beds stood side by side , and every night when they were in them the king locked the door , and bolted it .
but in the morning when he unlocked the door , he saw that their shoes were worn out with dancing , and no one could find out how that had come to pass .
then the king caused it to be proclaimed that whosoever could discover where they danced at night , should choose one of them for his wife and be king after his death , but that whosoever came forward and had not discovered it within three days and nights , should have forfeited his life .
it was not long before a king ' s son presented himself , and offered to undertake the enterprise .
he was well received , and in the evening was led into a room adjoining the princesses ' sleeping - chamber .
his bed was placed there , and he was to observe where they went and danced , and in order that they might do nothing secretly or go away to some other place , the door of their room was left open . but the eyelids of the prince grew heavy as lead , and he fell asleep , and when he awoke in the morning , all twelve had been to the dance , for their shoes were standing there with holes in the soles .
on the second and third nights it fell out just the same , and then his head was struck off without mercy .
many others came after this and undertook the enterprise , but all forfeited their lives .
now it came to pass that a poor soldier , who had a wound , and could serve no longer , found himself on the road to the town where the king lived .
there he met an old woman , who asked him where he was going .
" i hardly know myself ," answered he , and added in jest , " i had half a mind to discover where the princesses danced their shoes into holes , and thus become king ."
- " that is not so difficult ," said the old woman , " you must not drink the wine which will be brought to you at night , and must pretend to be sound asleep ."
with that she gave him a little cloak , and said , " if you put on that , you will be invisible , and then you can steal after the twelve ."
when the soldier had received this good advice , he went into the thing in earnest , took heart , went to the king , and announced himself as a suitor .
he was as well received as the others , and royal garments were put upon him .
he was conducted that evening at bed - time into the ante - chamber , and as he was about to go to bed , the eldest came and brought him a cup of wine , but he had tied a sponge under his chin , and let the wine run down into it , without drinking a drop .
then he lay down and when he had lain a while , he began to snore , as if in the deepest sleep .
the twelve princesses heard that , and laughed , and the eldest said , " he , too , might as well have saved his life ."
with that they got up , opened wardrobes , presses , cupboards , and brought out pretty dresses ; dressed themselves before the mirrors , sprang about , and rejoiced at the prospect of the dance .
only the youngest said , " i know not how it is ; you are very happy , but i feel very strange ; some misfortune is certainly about to befall us ."
- " thou art a goose , who art always frightened ," said the eldest .
" hast thou forgotten how many kings ' sons have already come here in vain ?
i had hardly any need to give the soldier a sleeping - draught , in any case the clown would not have awakened ."
when they were all ready they looked carefully at the soldier , but he had closed his eyes and did not move or stir , so they felt themselves quite secure .
the eldest then went to her bed and tapped it ; it immediately sank into the earth , and one after the other they descended through the opening , the eldest going first .
the soldier , who had watched everything , tarried no longer , put on his little cloak , and went down last with the youngest .
half - way down the steps , he just trod a little on her dress ; she was terrified at that , and cried out , " what is that ?
who is pulling my dress ?"
- " don ' t be so silly !"
said the eldest , " you have caught it on a nail ."
then they went all the way down , and when they were at the bottom , they were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees , all the leaves of which were of silver , and shone and glistened .
the soldier thought , " i must carry a token away with me ," and broke off a twig from one of them , on which the tree cracked with a loud report .
the youngest cried out again .
" something is wrong , did you hear the crack ?"
but the eldest said , " it is a gun fired for joy , because we have got rid of our prince so quickly ."
after that they came into an avenue where all the leaves were of gold , and lastly into a third where they were of bright diamonds ; he broke off a twig from each , which made such a crack each time that the youngest started back in terror , but the eldest still maintained that they were salutes .
they went on and came to a great lake whereon stood twelve little boats , and in every boat sat a handsome prince , all of whom were waiting for the twelve , and each took one of them with him , but the soldier seated himself by the youngest .
then her prince said , " i can ' t tell why the boat is so much heavier to - day ; i shall have to row with all my strength , if i am to get it across ."
- " what should cause that ," said the youngest , " but the warm weather ?
i feel very warm too ."
on the opposite side of the lake stood a splendid , brightly - lit castle , from whence resounded the joyous music of trumpets and kettle - drums .
they rowed over there , entered , and each prince danced with the girl he loved , but the soldier danced with them unseen , and when one of them had a cup of wine in her hand he drank it up , so that the cup was empty when she carried it to her mouth ; the youngest was alarmed at this , but the eldest always made her be silent .
they danced there till three o ' clock in the morning when all the shoes were danced into holes , and they were forced to leave off ; the princes rowed them back again over the lake , and this time the soldier seated himself by the eldest .
on the shore they took leave of their princes , and promised to return the following night .
when they reached the stairs the soldier ran on in front and lay down in his bed , and when the twelve had come up slowly and wearily , he was already snoring so loudly that they could all hear him , and they said , " so far as he is concerned , we are safe ."
they took off their beautiful dresses , laid them away , put the worn - out shoes under the bed , and lay down .
next morning the soldier was resolved not to speak , but to watch the wonderful goings on , and again went with them .
then everything was done just as it had been done the first time , and each time they danced until their shoes were worn to pieces .
but the third time he took a cup away with him as a token .
when the hour had arrived for him to give his answer , he took the three twigs and the cup , and went to the king , but the twelve stood behind the door , and listened for what he was going to say .
when the king put the question , " where have my twelve daughters danced their shoes to pieces in the night ?"
he answered , " in an underground castle with twelve princes ," and related how it had come to pass , and brought out the tokens .
the king then summoned his daughters , and asked them if the soldier had told the truth , and when they saw that they were betrayed , and that falsehood would be of no avail , they were obliged to confess all .
thereupon the king asked which of them he would have to wife ?
he answered , " i am no longer young , so give me the eldest ."
then the wedding was celebrated on the self - same day , and the kingdom was promised him after the king ' s death .
but the princes were bewitched for as many days as they had danced nights with the twelve .
