in former times there lived an aged queen who was a sorceress , and her daughter was the most beautiful maiden under the sun .
the old woman , however , had no other thought than how to lure mankind to destruction , and when a wooer appeared , she said that whosoever wished to have her daughter , must first perform a task , or die .
many had been dazzled by the daughter ' s beauty , and had actually risked this , but they never could accomplish what the old woman enjoined them to do , and then no mercy was shown ; they had to kneel down , and their heads were struck off .
a certain king ' s son who had also heard of the maiden ' s beauty , said to his father , " let me go there , i want to demand her in marriage ."
- " never ," answered the king ; " if you were to go , it would be going to your death ."
on this the son lay down and was sick unto death , and for seven years he lay there , and no physician could heal him .
when the father perceived that all hope was over , with a heavy heart he said to him , " go thither , and try your luck , for i know no other means of curing you ."
when the son heard that , he rose from his bed and was well again , and joyfully set out on his way . and it came to pass that as he was riding across a heath , he saw from afar something like a great heap of hay lying on the ground , and when he drew nearer , he could see that it was the stomach of a man , who had laid himself down there , but the stomach looked like a small mountain .
when the fat man saw the traveller , he stood up and said , " if you are in need of any one , take me into your service ."
the prince answered , " what can i do with such a great big man ?"
- " oh ," said the stout one , " this is nothing , when i stretch myself out well , i am three thousand times fatter ."
- " if that ' s the case ," said the prince , " i can make use of thee , come with me ."
so the stout one followed the prince , and after a while they found another man who was lying on the ground with his ear laid to the turf .
" what art thou doing there ?"
asked the king ' s son .
" i am listening ," replied the man .
" what art thou listening to so attentively ?"
- " i am listening to what is just going on in the world , for nothing escapes my ears ; i even hear the grass growing ."
- " tell me ," said the prince , " what thou hearest at the court of the old queen who has the beautiful daughter ."
then he answered , " i hear the whizzing of the sword that is striking off a wooer ' s head ."
the king ' s son said , " i can make use of thee , come with me ."
they went onwards , and then saw a pair of feet lying and part of a pair of legs , but could not see the rest of the body .
when they had walked on for a great distance , they came to the body , and at last to the head also .
" why ," said the prince , " what a tall rascal thou art !"
- " oh ," replied the tall one , " that is nothing at all yet ; when i really stretch out my limbs , i am three thousand times as tall , and taller than the highest mountain on earth .
i will gladly enter your service , if you will take me ."
- " come with me ," said the prince , " i can make use of thee ."
they went onwards and found a man sitting by the road who had bound up his eyes .
the prince said to him , " hast thou weak eyes , that thou canst not look at the light ?"
- " no ," replied the man , " but i must not remove the bandage , for whatsoever i look at with my eyes , splits to pieces , my glance is so powerful .
if you can use that , i shall be glad to serve you ."
- " come with me ," replied the king ' s son , " i can make use of thee ."
they journeyed onwards and found a man who was lying in the hot sunshine , trembling and shivering all over his body , so that not a limb was still .
" how canst thou shiver when the sun is shining so warm ?"
said the king ' s son .
" alack ," replied the man , " i am of quite a different nature .
the hotter it is , the colder i am , and the frost pierces through all my bones ; and the colder it is , the hotter i am .
in the midst of ice , i cannot endure the heat , nor in the midst of fire , the cold ."
- " thou art a strange fellow ," said the prince , " but if thou wilt enter my service , follow me ."
they travelled onwards , and saw a man standing who made a long neck and looked about him , and could see over all the mountains .
" what art thou looking at so eagerly ?"
said the king ' s son .
the man replied , " i have such sharp eyes that i can see into every forest and field , and hill and valley , all over the world ."
the prince said , " come with me if thou wilt , for i am still in want of such an one .
" and now the king ' s son and his six servants came to the town where the aged queen dwelt .
he did not tell her who he was , but said , " if you will give me your beautiful daughter , i will perform any task you set me ."
the sorceress was delighted to get such a handsome youth as this into her net , and said , " i will set thee three tasks , and if thou art able to perform them all , thou shalt be husband and master of my daughter ."
- " what is the first to be ?"
- " thou shalt fetch me my ring which i have dropped into the red sea ."
so the king ' s son went home to his servants and said , " the first task is not easy .
a ring is to be got out of the red sea .
come , find some way of doing it ."
then the man with the sharp sight said , " i will see where it is lying ," and looked down into the water and said , " it is sticking there , on a pointed stone ."
the tall one carried them thither , and said , " i would soon get it out , if i could only see it ."
- " oh , is that all !"
cried the stout one , and lay down and put his mouth to the water , on which all the waves fell into it just as if it had been a whirlpool , and he drank up the whole sea till it was as dry as a meadow .
the tall one stooped down a little , and brought out the ring with his hand .
then the king ' s son rejoiced when he had the ring , and took it to the old queen .
she was astonished , and said , " yes , it is the right ring .
thou hast safely performed the first task , but now comes the second .
dost thou see the meadow in front of my palace ?
three hundred fat oxen are feeding there , and these must thou eat , skin , hair , bones , horns and all , and down below in my cellar lie three hundred casks of wine , and these thou must drink up as well , and if one hair of the oxen , or one little drop of the wine is left , thy life will be forfeited to me ."
- " may i invite no guests to this repast ?"
inquired the prince , " no dinner is good without some company ."
the old woman laughed maliciously , and replied , " thou mayst invite one for the sake of companionship , but no more .
" the king ' s son went to his servants and said to the stout one , " thou shalt be my guest to - day , and shalt eat thy fill ."
hereupon the stout one stretched himself out and ate the three hundred oxen without leaving one single hair , and then he asked if he was to have nothing but his breakfast .
he drank the wine straight from the casks without feeling any need of a glass , and he licked the last drop from his finger - nails .
when the meal was over , the prince went to the old woman , and told her that the second task also was performed .
she wondered at this and said , " no one has ever done so much before , but one task still remains ," and she thought to herself , " thou shalt not escape me , and wilt not keep thy head on thy shoulders !
this night ," said she , " i will bring my daughter to thee in thy chamber , and thou shalt put thine arms round her , but when you are sitting there together , beware of falling asleep .
when twelve o ' clock is striking , i will come , and if she is then no longer in thine arms , thou art lost ."
the prince thought , " the task is easy , i will most certainly keep my eyes open ."
nevertheless he called his servants , told them what the old woman had said , and remarked , " who knows what treachery lurks behind this ?
foresight is a good thing keep watch , and take care that the maiden does not go out of my room again ."
when night fell , the old woman came with her daughter , and gave her into the princes ' s arms , and then the tall one wound himself round the two in a circle , and the stout one placed himself by the door , so that no living creature could enter .
there the two sat , and the maiden spake never a word , but the moon shone through the window on her face , and the prince could behold her wondrous beauty .
he did nothing but gaze at her , and was filled with love and happiness , and his eyes never felt weary .
this lasted until eleven o ' clock , when the old woman cast such a spell over all of them that they fell asleep , and at the self - same moment the maiden was carried away . then they all slept soundly until a quarter to twelve , when the magic lost its power , and all awoke again .
" oh , misery and misfortune !"
cried the prince , " now i am lost !"
the faithful servants also began to lament , but the listener said , " be quiet , i want to listen ."
then he listened for an instant and said , " she is on a rock , three hundred leagues from hence , bewailing her fate .
thou alone , tall one , canst help her ; if thou wilt stand up , thou wilt be there in a couple of steps .
"" yes ," answered the tall one , " but the one with the sharp eyes must go with me , that we may destroy the rock ."
then the tall one took the one with bandaged eyes on his back , and in the twinkling of an eye they were on the enchanted rock .
the tall one immediately took the bandage from the other ' s eyes , and he did but look round , and the rock shivered into a thousand pieces .
then the tall one took the maiden in his arms , carried her back in a second , then fetched his companion with the same rapidity , and before it struck twelve they were all sitting as they had sat before , quite merrily and happily .
when twelve struck , the aged sorceress came stealing in with a malicious face , which seemed to say , " now he is mine !"
for she believed that her daughter was on the rock three hundred leagues off ."
but when she saw her in the prince ' s arms , she was alarmed , and said , " here is one who knows more than i do !"
she dared not make any opposition , and was forced to give him her daughter .
but she whispered in her ear , " it is a disgrace to thee to have to obey common people , and that thou art not allowed to choose a husband to thine own liking .
" on this the proud heart of the maiden was filled with anger , and she meditated revenge .
next morning she caused three hundred great bundles of wood to be got together , and said to the prince that though the three tasks were performed , she would still not be his wife until some one was ready to seat himself in the midst of the wood , and bear the fire .
she thought that none of his servants would let themselves be burnt for him , and that out of love for her , he himself would place himself upon it , and then she would be free .
but the servants said , " every one of us has done something except the frosty one , he must set to work ," and they put him in the middle of the pile , and set fire to it .
then the fire began to burn , and burnt for three days until all the wood was consumed , and when the flames had burnt out , the frosty one was standing amid the ashes , trembling like an aspen leaf , and saying , " i never felt such a frost during the whole course of my life ; if it had lasted much longer , i should have been benumbed !
" as no other pretext was to be found , the beautiful maiden was now forced to take the unknown youth as a husband .
but when they drove away to church , the old woman said , " i cannot endure the disgrace ," and sent her warriors after them with orders to cut down all who opposed them , and bring back her daughter .
but the listener had sharpened his ears , and heard the secret discourse of the old woman .
" what shall we do ?"
said he to the stout one .
but he knew what to do , and spat out once or twice behind the carriage some of the sea - water which he had drunk , and a great sea arose in which the warriors were caught and drowned .
when the sorceress perceived that , she sent her mailed knights ; but the listener heard the rattling of their armour , and undid the bandage from one eye of sharp - eyes , who looked for a while rather fixedly at the enemy ' s troops , on which they all sprang to pieces like glass .
then the youth and the maiden went on their way undisturbed , and when the two had been blessed in church , the six servants took leave , and said to their master , " your wishes are now satisfied , you need us no longer , we will go our way and seek our fortunes .
" half a league from the palace of the prince ' s father was a village near which a swineherd tended his herd , and when they came thither the prince said to his wife , " do you know who i really am ?
i am no prince , but a herder of swine , and the man who is there with that herd , is my father .
we two shall have to set to work also , and help him ."
then he alighted with her at the inn , and secretly told the innkeepers to take away her royal apparel during the night .
so when she awoke in the morning , she had nothing to put on , and the innkeeper ' s wife gave her an old gown and a pair of worsted stockings , and at the same time seemed to consider it a great present , and said , " if it were not for the sake of your husband i should have given you nothing at all !"
then the princess believed that he really was a swineherd , and tended the herd with him , and thought to herself , " i have deserved this for my haughtiness and pride ."
this lasted for a week , and then she could endure it no longer , for she had sores on her feet .
and now came a couple of people who asked if she knew who her husband was .
" yes ," she answered , " he is a swineherd , and has just gone out with cords and ropes to try to drive a little bargain ."
but they said , " just come with us , and we will take you to him ," and they took her up to the palace , and when she entered the hall , there stood her husband in kingly raiment .
but she did not recognize him until he took her in his arms , kissed her , and said , " i suffered much for thee and now thou , too , hast had to suffer for me ."
and then the wedding was celebrated , and he who has told you all this , wishes that he , too , had been present at it .
