a woman was going about the unenclosed land with her daughter and her step - daughter cutting fodder , when the lord came walking towards them in the form of a poor man , and asked , " which is the way into the village ?"
- " if you want to know ," said the mother , " seek it for yourself ," and the daughter added , " if you are afraid you will not find it , take a guide with you ."
but the step - daughter said , " poor man , i will take you there , come with me ."
then god was angry with the mother and daughter , and turned his back on them , and wished that they should become as black as night and as ugly as sin .
to the poor step - daughter , however , god was gracious , and went with her , and when they were near the village , he said a blessing over her , and spake , " choose three things for thyself , and i will grant them to thee ."
then said the maiden , " i should like to be as beautiful and fair as the sun ," and instantly she was white and fair as day .
" then i should like to have a purse of money which would never grow empty ."
that the lord gave her also , but he said , " do not forget what is best of all ."
said she , " for my third wish , i desire , after my death , to inhabit the eternal kingdom of heaven ."
that also was granted unto her , and then the lord left her .
when the step - mother came home with her daughter , and they saw that they were both as black as coal and ugly , but that the step - daughter was white and beautiful , wickedness increased still more in their hearts , and they thought of nothing else but how they could do her an injury .
the step - daughter , however , had a brother called reginer , whom she loved much , and she told him all that had happened .
once on a time reginer said to her , " dear sister , i will take thy likeness , that i may continually see thee before mine eyes , for my love for thee is so great that i should like always to look at thee ."
then she answered , " but , i pray thee , let no one see the picture ."
so he painted his sister and hung up the picture in his room ; he , however , dwelt in the king ' s palace , for he was his coachman .
every day he went and stood before the picture , and thanked god for the happiness of having such a dear sister .
now it happened that the king whom he served , had just lost his wife , who had been so beautiful that no one could be found to compare with her , and on this account the king was in deep grief .
the attendants about the court , however , remarked that the coachman stood daily before this beautiful picture , and they were jealous of him , so they informed the king .
then the latter ordered the picture to be brought to him , and when he saw that it was like his lost wife in every respect , except that it was still more beautiful , he fell mortally in love with it .
he caused the coachman to be brought before him , and asked whom the portrait represented ?
the coachman said it was his sister , so the king resolved to take no one but her as his wife , and gave him a carriage and horses and splendid garments of cloth of gold , and sent him forth to fetch his chosen bride .
when reginer came on this errand , his sister was glad , but the black maiden was jealous of her good fortune , and grew angry above all measure , and said to her mother , " of what use are all your arts to us now when you cannot procure such a piece of luck for me ?"
- " be quiet ," said the old woman , " i will soon divert it to you ," and by her arts of witchcraft , she so troubled the eyes of the coachman that he was half - blind , and she stopped the ears of the white maiden so that she was half - deaf .
then they got into the carriage , first the bride in her noble royal apparel , then the step - mother with her daughter , and reginer sat on the box to drive .
when they had been on the way for some time the coachman cried ," cover thee well , my sister dear , that the rain may not wet thee , that the wind may not load thee with dust , that thou may ' st be fair and beautifulwhen thou appearest before the king .
" the bride asked , " what is my dear brother saying ?"
- " ah ," said the old woman , " he says that you ought to take off your golden dress and give it to your sister ."
then she took it off , and put it on the black maiden , who gave her in exchange for it a shabby grey gown .
they drove onwards , and a short time afterwards , the brother again cried ," cover thee well , my sister dear , that the rain may not wet thee , that the wind may not load thee with dust , that thou may ' st be fair and beautifulwhen thou appearest before the king .
" the bride asked , " what is my dear brother saying ?"
- " ah ," said the old woman , " he says that you ought to take off your golden hood and give it to your sister ."
so she took off the hood and put it on her sister , and sat with her own head uncovered .
and they drove on farther .
after a while , the brother once more cried ," cover thee well , my sister dear , that the rain may not wet thee , that the wind may not load thee with dust , that thou may ' st be fair and beautifulwhen thou appearest before the king .
" the bride asked , " what is my dear brother saying ?"
- " ah ," said the old woman , " he says you must look out of the carriage ."
they were , however , just on a bridge , which crossed deep water .
when the bride stood up and leant forward out of the carriage , they both pushed her out , and she fell into the middle of the water .
at the same moment that she sank , a snow - white duck arose out of the mirror - smooth water , and swam down the river .
the brother had observed nothing of it , and drove the carriage on until they reached the court .
then he took the black maiden to the king as his sister , and thought she really was so , because his eyes were dim , and he saw the golden garments glittering .
when the king saw the boundless ugliness of his intended bride , he was very angry , and ordered the coachman to be thrown into a pit which was full of adders and nests of snakes .
the old witch , however , knew so well how to flatter the king and deceive his eyes by her arts , that he kept her and her daughter until she appeared quite endurable to him , and he really married her . one evening when the black bride was sitting on the king ' s knee , a white duck came swimming up the gutter to the kitchen , and said to the kitchen - boy , " boy , light a fire , that i may warm my feathers ."
the kitchen - boy did it , and lighted a fire on the hearth .
then came the duck and sat down by it , and shook herself and smoothed her feathers to rights with her bill .
while she was thus sitting and enjoying herself , she asked , " what is my brother reginer doing ?"
the scullery - boy replied , " he is imprisoned in the pit with adders and with snakes ."
then she asked , " what is the black witch doing in the house ?"
the boy answered , " she is loved by the king and happy .
"" may god have mercy on him ," said the duck , and swam forth by the sink . the next night she came again and put the same questions , and the third night also .
then the kitchen - boy could bear it no longer , and went to the king and discovered all to him .
the king , however , wanted to see it for himself , and next evening went thither , and when the duck thrust her head in through the sink , he took his sword and cut through her neck , and suddenly she changed into a most beautiful maiden , exactly like the picture , which her brother had made of her .
the king was full of joy , and as she stood there quite wet , he caused splendid apparel to be brought and had her clothed in it .
then she told how she had been betrayed by cunning and falsehood , and at last thrown down into the water , and her first request was that her brother should be brought forth from the pit of snakes , and when the king had fulfilled this request , he went into the chamber where the old witch was , and asked , what does she deserve who does this and that ?
and related what had happened .
then was she so blinded that she was aware of nothing and said , " she deserves to be stripped naked , and put into a barrel with nails , and that a horse should be harnessed to the barrel , and the horse sent all over the world ."
all of which was done to her , and to her black daughter .
but the king married the white and beautiful bride , and rewarded her faithful brother , and made him a rich and distinguished man .
