there was once on a time a king who had a great forest near his palace , full of all kinds of wild animals .
one day he sent out a huntsman to shoot him a roe , but he did not come back .
" perhaps some accident has befallen him ," said the king , and the next day he sent out two more huntsmen who were to search for him , but they too stayed away .
then on the third day , he sent for all his huntsmen , and said , " scour the whole forest through , and do not give up until ye have found all three ."
but of these also , none came home again , and of the pack of hounds which they had taken with them , none were seen more .
from that time forth , no one would any longer venture into the forest , and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude , and nothing was seen of it , but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it .
this lasted for many years , when a strange huntsman announced himself to the king as seeking a situation , and offered to go into the dangerous forest .
the king , however , would not give his consent , and said , " it is not safe in there ; i fear it would fare with thee no better than with the others , and thou wouldst never come out again ."
the huntsman replied , " lord , i will venture it at my own risk , of fear i know nothing .
" the huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest .
it was not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way , and wanted to pursue it ; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a deep pool , could go no farther , and a naked arm stretched itself out of the water , seized it , and drew it under , when the huntsman saw that , he went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the water .
when they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body was brown like rusty iron , and whose hair hung over his face down to his knees .
they bound him with cords , and led him away to the castle .
there was great astonishment over the wild man ; the king , however , had him put in an iron cage in his court - yard , and forbade the door to be opened on pain of death , and the queen herself was to take the key into her keeping .
and from this time forth every one could again go into the forest with safety . the king had a son of eight years , who was once playing in the court - yard , and while he was playing , his golden ball fell into the cage .
the boy ran thither and said , " give me my ball out ."
- " not till thou hast opened the door for me ," answered the man .
" no ," said the boy , " i will not do that ; the king has forbidden it ," and ran away .
the next day he again went and asked for his ball ; the wild man said , " open my door ," but the boy would not .
on the third day the king had ridden out hunting , and the boy went once more and said , " i cannot open the door even if i wished , for i have not the key ."
then the wild man said , " it lies under thy mother ' s pillow , thou canst get it there ."
the boy , who wanted to have his ball back , cast all thought to the winds , and brought the key .
the door opened with difficulty , and the boy pinched his fingers .
when it was open the wild man stepped out , gave him the golden ball , and hurried away .
the boy had become afraid ; he called and cried after him , " oh , wild man , do not go away , or i shall be beaten !"
the wild man turned back , took him up , set him on his shoulder , and went with hasty steps into the forest .
when the king came home , he observed the empty cage , and asked the queen how that had happened ?
she knew nothing about it , and sought the key , but it was gone .
she called the boy , but no one answered .
the king sent out people to seek for him in the fields , but they did not find him .
then he could easily guess what had happened , and much grief reigned in the royal court . when the wild man had once more reached the dark forest , he took the boy down from his shoulder , and said to him , " thou wilt never see thy father and mother again , but i will keep thee with me , for thou hast set me free , and i have compassion on thee .
if thou dost all i bid thee , thou shalt fare well .
of treasure and gold have i enough , and more than anyone in the world ."
he made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept , and the next morning the man took him to a well , and said , " behold , the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal , thou shalt sit beside it , and take care that nothing falls into it , or it will be polluted .
i will come every evening to see if thou hast obeyed my order ."
the boy placed himself by the margin of the well , and often saw a golden fish or a golden snake show itself therein , and took care that nothing fell in .
as he was thus sitting , his finger hurt him so violently that he involuntarily put it in the water .
he drew it quickly out again , but saw that it was quite gilded , and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold off again , all was to no purpose .
in the evening iron john came back , looked at the boy , and said , " what has happened to the well ?"
- " nothing , nothing ," he answered , and held his finger behind his back , that the man might not see it .
but he said , " thou hast dipped thy finger into the water , this time it may pass , but take care thou dost not again let anything go in ."
by daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and watching it .
his finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head , and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well .
he took it quickly out , but it was already quite gilded .
iron john came , and already knew what had happened .
" thou hast let a hair fall into the well ," said he .
" i will allow thee to watch by it once more , but if this happens for the third time then the well is polluted , and thou canst no longer remain with me .
" on the third day , the boy sat by the well , and did not stir his finger , however much it hurt him .
but the time was long to him , and he looked at the reflection of his face on the surface of the water .
and as he still bent down more and more while he was doing so , and trying to look straight into the eyes , his long hair fell down from his shoulders into the water .
he raised himself up quickly , but the whole of the hair of his head was already golden and shone like the sun .
you may imagine how terrified the poor boy was !
he took his pocket - handkerchief and tied it round his head , in order that the man might not see it .
when he came he already knew everything , and said , " take the handkerchief off ."
then the golden hair streamed forth , and let the boy excuse himself as he might , it was of no use .
" thou hast not stood the trial , and canst stay here no longer .
go forth into the world , there thou wilt learn what poverty is .
but as thou hast not a bad heart , and as i mean well by thee , there is one thing i will grant thee ; if thou fallest into any difficulty , come to the forest and cry , " iron john ," and then i will come and help thee .
my power is great , greater than thou thinkest , and i have gold and silver in abundance .
" then the king ' s son left the forest , and walked by beaten and unbeaten paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city .
there he looked for work , but could find none , and he had learnt nothing by which he could help himself .
at length he went to the palace , and asked if they would take him in .
the people about court did not at all know what use they could make of him , but they liked him , and told him to stay .
at length the cook took him into his service , and said he might carry wood and water , and rake the cinders together .
once when it so happened that no one else was at hand , the cook ordered him to carry the food to the royal table , but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen , he kept his little cap on .
such a thing as that had never yet come under the king ' s notice , and he said , " when thou comest to the royal table thou must take thy hat off ."
he answered , " ah , lord , i cannot ; i have a bad sore place on my head ."
then the king had the cook called before him and scolded him , and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his service ; and that he was to turn him off at once .
the cook , however , had pity on him , and exchanged him for the gardener ' s boy . and now the boy had to plant and water the garden , hoe and dig , and bear the wind and bad weather .
once in summer when he was working alone in the garden , the day was so warm he took his little cap off that the air might cool him .
as the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into the bed - room of the king ' s daughter , and up she sprang to see what that could be .
then she saw the boy , and cried to him , " boy , bring me a wreath of flowers ."
he put his cap on with all haste , and gathered wild field - flowers and bound them together .
when he was ascending the stairs with them , the gardener met him , and said , " how canst thou take the king ' s daughter a garland of such common flowers ?
go quickly , and get another , and seek out the prettiest and rarest ."
- " oh , no ," replied the boy , " the wild ones have more scent , and will please her better ."
when he got into the room , the king ' s daughter said , " take thy cap off , it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence ."
he again said , " i may not , i have a sore head ."
she , however , caught at his cap and pulled it off , and then his golden hair rolled down on his shoulders , and it was splendid to behold .
he wanted to run out , but she held him by the arm , and gave him a handful of ducats .
with these he departed , but he cared nothing for the gold pieces .
he took them to the gardener , and said , " i present them to thy children , they can play with them ."
the following day the king ' s daughter again called to him that he was to bring her a wreath of field - flowers , and when he went in with it , she instantly snatched at his cap , and wanted to take it away from him , but he held it fast with both hands .
she again gave him a handful of ducats , but he would not keep them , and gave them to the gardener for playthings for his children .
on the third day things went just the same ; she could not get his cap away from him , and he would not have her money . not long afterwards , the country was overrun by war .
the king gathered together his people , and did not know whether or not he could offer any opposition to the enemy , who was superior in strength and had a mighty army .
then said the gardener ' s boy , " i am grown up , and will go to the wars also , only give me a horse ."
the others laughed , and said , " seek one for thyself when we are gone , we will leave one behind us in the stable for thee ."
when they had gone forth , he went into the stable , and got the horse out ; it was lame of one foot , and limped hobblety jig , hobblety jig ; nevertheless he mounted it , and rode away to the dark forest .
when he came to the outskirts , he called " iron john ," three times so loudly that it echoed through the trees .
thereupon the wild man appeared immediately , and said , " what dost thou desire ?"
- " i want a strong steed , for i am going to the wars ."
- " that thou shalt have , and still more than thou askest for ."
then the wild man went back into the forest , and it was not long before a stable - boy came out of it , who led a horse that snorted with its nostrils , and could hardly be restrained , and behind them followed a great troop of soldiers entirely equipped in iron , and their swords flashed in the sun .
the youth made over his three - legged horse to the stable - boy , mounted the other , and rode at the head of the soldiers .
when he got near the battle - field a great part of the king ' s men had already fallen , and little was wanting to make the rest give way .
then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers , broke like a hurricane over the enemy , and beat down all who opposed him .
they began to fly , but the youth pursued , and never stopped , until there was not a single man left .
instead , however , of returning to the king , he conducted his troop by bye - ways back to the forest , and called forth iron john .
" what dost thou desire ?"
asked the wild man .
" take back thy horse and thy troops , and give me my three - legged horse again ."
all that he asked was done , and soon he was riding on his three - legged horse .
when the king returned to his palace , his daughter went to meet him , and wished him joy of his victory .
" i am not the one who carried away the victory ," said he , " but a stranger knight who came to my assistance with his soldiers ."
the daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was , but the king did not know , and said , " he followed the enemy , and i did not see him again ."
she inquired of the gardener where his boy was , but he smiled , and said , " he has just come home on his three - legged horse , and the others have been mocking him , and crying , " here comes our hobblety jig back again !"
they asked , too , " under what hedge hast thou been lying sleeping all the time ?"
he , however , said , " i did the best of all , and it would have gone badly without me ."
and then he was still more ridiculed .
" the king said to his daughter , " i will proclaim a great feast that shall last for three days , and thou shalt throw a golden apple .
perhaps the unknown will come to it ."
when the feast was announced , the youth went out to the forest , and called iron john .
" what dost thou desire ?"
asked he .
" that i may catch the king ' s daughter ' s golden apple ."
- " it is as safe as if thou hadst it already ," said iron john .
" thou shalt likewise have a suit of red armour for the occasion , and ride on a spirited chestnut - horse ."
when the day came , the youth galloped to the spot , took his place amongst the knights , and was recognized by no one .
the king ' s daughter came forward , and threw a golden apple to the knights , but none of them caught it but he , only as soon as he had it he galloped away . on the second day iron john equipped him as a white knight , and gave him a white horse .
again he was the only one who caught the apple , and he did not linger an instant , but galloped off with it .
the king grew angry , and said , " that is not allowed ; he must appear before me and tell his name ."
he gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple , should go away again they should pursue him , and if he would not come back willingly , they were to cut him down and stab him . on the third day , he received from iron john a suit of black armour and a black horse , and again he caught the apple .
but when he was riding off with it , the king ' s attendants pursued him , and one of them got so near him that he wounded the youth ' s leg with the point of his sword .
the youth nevertheless escaped from them , but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fell from the youth ' s head , and they could see that he had golden hair .
they rode back and announced this to the king . the following day the king ' s daughter asked the gardener about his boy .
" he is at work in the garden ; the queer creature has been at the festival too , and only came home yesterday evening ; he has likewise shown my children three golden apples which he has won .
" the king had him summoned into his presence , and he came and again had his little cap on his head .
but the king ' s daughter went up to him and took it off , and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders , and he was so handsome that all were amazed .
" art thou the knight who came every day to the festival , always in different colours , and who caught the three golden apples ?"
asked the king .
" yes ," answered he , " and here the apples are ," and he took them out of his pocket , and returned them to the king .
" if you desire further proof , you may see the wound which your people gave me when they followed me .
but i am likewise the knight who helped you to your victory over your enemies ."
- " if thou canst perform such deeds as that , thou art no gardener ' s boy ; tell me , who is thy father ?"
- " my father is a mighty king , and gold have i in plenty as great as i require ."
- " i well see ," said the king , " that i owe thanks to thee ; can i do anything to please thee ?"
- " yes ," answered he , " that indeed you can .
give me your daughter to wife ."
the maiden laughed , and said , " he does not stand much on ceremony , but i have already seen by his golden hair that he was no gardener ' s boy ," and then she went and kissed him .
his father and mother came to the wedding , and were in great delight , for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son again .
and as they were sitting at the marriage - feast , the music suddenly stopped , the doors opened , and a stately king came in with a great retinue .
he went up to the youth , embraced him and said , " i am iron john , and was by enchantment a wild man , but thou hast set me free ; all the treasures which i possess , shall be thy property ."
