there were once two brothers , the one rich , the other poor .
the rich one , however , gave nothing to the poor one , and he gained a scanty living by trading in corn , and often did so badly that he had no bread for his wife and children .
once when he was wheeling a barrow through the forest he saw , on one side of him , a great , bare , naked - looking mountain , and as he had never seen it before , he stood still and stared at it with amazement . while he was thus standing he saw a twelve great , wild men coming towards him , and as he believed they were robbers he pushed his barrow into the thicket , climbed up a tree , and waited to see what would happen .
the twelve men , however , went to the mountain and cried , " semsi mountain , semsi mountain , open ," and immediately the barren mountain opened down the middle , and the twelve went into it , and as soon as they were within , it shut .
after a short time , however , it opened again , and the men came forth carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders , and when they were all once more in the daylight they said , " semsi mountain , semsi mountain , shut thyself ;" then the mountain closed together , and there was no longer any entrance to be seen to it , and the twelve went away . when they were quite out of sight the poor man got down from the tree , and was curious to know what really was secretly hidden in the mountain .
so he went up to it and said , " semsi mountain , semsi mountain , open ," and the mountain opened to him also .
the he went inside , and the whole mountain was a cavern full of silver and gold , and behind lay great piles of pearls and sparkling jewels , heaped up like corn .
the poor man hardly knew what to do , and whether he might take any of these treasures for himself or not ; but at last he filled his pockets with gold , but he left the pearls and precious stones where they were .
when he came out again he also said , " semsi mountain , semsi mountain , shut thyself ;" and the mountain closed itself , and he went home with his barrow . and now he had no more cause for anxiety , but could buy bread for his wife and children with his gold , and wine into the bargain .
he lived joyously and uprightly , gave help to the poor , and did good to every one .
when , however , the money came to an end he went to his brother , borrowed a measure that held a bushel , and brought himself some more , but did not touch any of the most valuable things .
when for the third time he wanted to fetch something , he again borrowed the measure of his brother .
the rich man had , however , long been envious of his brother ' s possessions , and of the handsome way of living which he had set on foot , and could not understand from whence the riches came , and what his brother wanted with the measure .
then he thought of a cunning trick , and covered the bottom of the measure with pitch , and when he got the measure back a piece of money was sticking in it .
he at once went to his brother and asked him , " what hast thou been measuring in the bushel measure ?"
- " corn and barley ," said the other .
then he showed him the piece of money , and threatened that if he did not tell the truth he would accuse him before a court of justice .
the poor man then told him everything , just as it happened .
the rich man , however , ordered his carriage to be made ready , and drove away , resolved to use the opportunity better than his brother had done , and to bring back with him quite different treasures .
when he came to the mountain he cried , " semsi mountain , semsi mountain , open ."
the mountain opened , and he went inside it .
there lay the treasures all before him , and for a long time he did not know which to clutch at first .
at length he loaded himself with as many precious stones as he could carry .
he wished to carry his burden outside , but , as his heart and soul were entirely full of the treasures , he had forgotten the name of the mountain , and cried , " simeli mountain , simeli mountain , open ."
that , however , was not the right name , and the mountain never stirred , but remained shut .
then he was alarmed , but the longer he thought about it the more his thoughts confused themselves , and his treasures were no more of any use to him .
in the evening the mountain opened , and the twelve robbers came in , and when they saw him they laughed , and cried out , " bird , have we caught thee at last !
didst thou think we had never noticed that thou hadst been in here twice ?
we could not catch thee then ; this third time thou shalt not get out again !"
then he cried , " it was not i , it was my brother ," but let him beg for his life and say what he would , they cut his head off .
