there was once a poor woman who had a son , who much wished to travel , but his mother said , " how canst thou travel ?
we have no money at all for thee to take away with thee ."
then said the son , " i will manage very well for myself ; i will always say , ' not much , not much , not much .
'" so he walked for a long time and always said , " not much , not much , not much ."
then he passed by a company of fishermen and said , " god speed you !
not much , not much , not much ."
- " what sayst thou churl , not much ?"
and when the net was drawn out they had not caught much fish .
so one of them fell on the youth with a stick and said , " hast thou never seen me threshing ?"
- " what ought i to say , then ?"
asked the youth .
" thou must say , ' get it full , get it full .
'" after this he again walked a long time , and said , " get it full , get it full ," until he came to the gallows , where they had got a poor sinner whom they were about to hang .
then said he , " good morning ; get it full , get it full ."
- " what sayst thou , knave , get it full ?
dost thou want to make out that there are still more wicked people in the world is not this enough ?"
and he again got some blows on his back .
" what am i to say , then ?"
said he .
" thou must say , ' may god have pity on the poor soul .
'" again the youth walked on for a long while and said , " may god have pity on the poor soul !"
then he came to a pit by which stood a knacker who was cutting up a horse .
the youth said , " good morning ; god have pity on the poor soul !"
- " what dost thou say , thou ill - tempered knave ?"
and the knacker gave him such a box on the ear , that he could not see out of his eyes .
" what am i to say , then ?"
- " thou must say , ' there lies the carrion in the pit !
'" so he walked on , and always said , " there lies the carrion in the pit , there lies the carrion in the pit ."
and he came to a cart full of people , so he said , " good morning , there lies the carrion in the pit !"
then the cart pushed him into a hole , and the driver took his whip and cracked it upon the youth , till he was forced to crawl back to his mother , and as long as he lived he never went out a - travelling again .
