once on a time there lived a king and a queen , who were rich , and had everything they wanted , but no children .
the queen lamented over this day and night , and said , " i am like a field on which nothing grows ."
at last god gave her her wish , but when the child came into the world , it did not look like a human child , but was a little donkey .
when the mother saw that , her lamentations and outcries began in real earnest ; she said she would far rather have had no child at all than have a donkey , and that they were to throw it into the water that the fishes might devour it .
but the king said , " no , since god has sent him he shall be my son and heir , and after my death sit on the royal throne , and wear the kingly crown ."
the donkey , therefore , was brought up and grew bigger , and his ears grew up beautifully high and straight .
he was , however , of a merry disposition , jumped about , played and had especial pleasure in music , so that he went to a celebrated musician and said , " teach me thine art , that i may play the lute as well as thou dost ."
- " ah , dear little master ," answered the musician , " that would come very hard to you , your fingers are certainly not suited to it , and are far too big .
i am afraid the strings would not last ."
no excuses were of any use .
the donkey was determined to play the lute ; he was persevering and industrious , and at last learnt to do it as well as the master himself .
the young lordling once went out walking full of thought and came to a well , he looked into it and in the mirror - clear water saw his donkey ' s form .
he was so distressed about it , that he went out into the wide world and only took with him one faithful companion .
they travelled up and down , and at last they came into a kingdom where an old king reigned who had an only but wonderfully beautiful daughter .
the donkey said , " here we will stay ," knocked at the gate , and cried , " a guest is without open , that he may enter ."
as , however , the gate was not opened , he sat down , took his lute and played it in the most delightful manner with his two fore - feet .
then the door - keeper opened his eyes most wonderfully wide , and ran to the king and said , " outside by the gate sits a young donkey which plays the lute as well as an experienced master !"
- " then let the musician come to me ," said the king .
when , however , a donkey came in , every one began to laugh at the lute - player .
and now the donkey was asked to sit down and eat with the servants .
he , however , was unwilling , and said , " i am no common stable - ass , i am a noble one ."
then they said , " if that is what thou art , seat thyself with the men of war ."
- " no ," said he , " i will sit by the king ."
the king smiled , and said good - humouredly , " yes , it shall be as thou wilt , little ass , come here to me ."
then he asked , " little ass , how does my daughter please thee ?"
the donkey turned his head towards her , looked at her , nodded and said , " i like her above measure , i have never yet seen anyone so beautiful as she is ."
- " well , then , thou shalt sit next her too ," said the king .
" that is exactly what i wish ," said the donkey , and he placed himself by her side , ate and drank , and knew how to behave himself daintily and cleanly .
when the noble beast had stayed a long time at the king ' s court , he thought , " what good does all this do me , i shall still have to go home again ?"
let his head hang sadly , and went to the king and asked for his dismissal .
but the king had grown fond of him , and said , " little ass , what ails thee ?
thou lookest as sour as a jug of vinegar , i will give thee what thou wantest .
dost thou want gold ?"
- " no ," said the donkey , and shook his head .
" dost thou want jewels and rich dress ?"
- " no ."
- " dost thou wish for half my kingdom ?"
- " indeed , no ."
then said the king , if i did but know what would make thee content .
wilt thou have my pretty daughter to wife ?"
- " ah , yes ," said the ass , " i should indeed like her ," and all at once he became quite merry and full of happiness , for that was exactly what he was wishing for .
so a great and splendid wedding was held .
in the evening , when the bride and bridegroom were led into their bed - room , the king wanted to know if the ass would behave well , and ordered a servant to hide himself there .
when they were both within , the bridegroom bolted the door , looked around , and as he believed that they were quite alone , he suddenly threw off his ass ' s skin , and stood there in the form of a handsome royal youth .
" now ," said he , " thou seest who i am , and seest also that i am not unworthy of thee ."
then the bride was glad , and kissed him , and loved him dearly .
when morning came , he jumped up , put his animal ' s skin on again , and no one could have guessed what kind of a form was hidden beneath it .
soon came the old king , " ah ," cried he , " is the little ass merry ?
but surely thou art sad ?"
said he to his daughter , " that thou hast not got a proper man for thy husband ?"
- " oh , no , dear father , i love him as well as if he were the handsomest in the world , and i will keep him as long as i live ."
the king was surprised , but the servant who had concealed himself came and revealed everything to him .
the king said , " that cannot be true ."
- " then watch yourself the next night , and you will see it with your own eyes ; and hark you , lord king , if you were to take his skin away and throw it in the fire , he would be forced to show himself in his true shape ."
- " thy advice is good ," said the king , and at night when they were asleep , he stole in , and when he got to the bed he saw by the light of the moon a noble - looking youth lying there , and the skin lay stretched on the ground .
so he took it away , and had a great fire lighted outside , and threw the skin into it , and remained by it himself until it was all burnt to ashes .
as , however , he was anxious to know how the robbed man would behave himself , he stayed awake the whole night and watched .
when the youth had slept his sleep out , he got up by the first light of morning , and wanted to put on the ass ' s skin , but it was not to be found .
on this he was alarmed , and , full of grief and anxiety , said , " now i shall have to contrive to escape ."
but when he went out , there stood the king , who said , " my son , whither away in such haste ?
what hast thou in mind ?
stay here , thou art such a handsome man , thou shalt not go away from me .
i will now give thee half my kingdom , and after my death thou shalt have the whole of it ."
- " then i hope that what begins so well may end well , and i will stay with you ," said the youth .
and the old man gave him half the kingdom , and in a year ' s time , when he died , the youth had the whole , and after the death of his father he had another kingdom as well , and lived in all magnificence .
