there were once two brothers who both served as soldiers ; one of them was rich , and the other poor .
then the poor one , to escape from his poverty , put off his soldier ' s coat , and turned farmer .
he dug and hoed his bit of land , and sowed it with turnip - seed .
the seed came up , and one turnip grew there which became large and vigorous , and visibly grew bigger and bigger , and seemed as if it would never stop growing , so that it might have been called the princess of turnips , for never was such an one seen before , and never will such an one be seen again . at length it was so enormous that by itself it filled a whole cart , and two oxen were required to draw it , and the farmer had not the least idea what he was to do with the turnip , or whether it would be a fortune to him or a misfortune .
at last he thought , " if thou sellest it , what wilt thou get for it that is of any importance , and if thou eatest it thyself , why , the small turnips would do thee just as much good ; it would be better to take it to the king , and make him a present of it .
" so he placed it on a cart , harnessed two oxen , took it to the palace , and presented it to the king .
" what strange thing is this ?"
said the king .
" many wonderful things have come before my eyes , but never such a monster as this !
from what seed can this have sprung , or are you a luck - child and have met with it by chance ?"
- " ah , no !"
said the farmer , " no luck - child am i . i am a poor soldier , who because he could no longer support himself hung his soldier ' s coat on a nail and took to farming land .
i have a brother who is rich and well known to you , lord king , but i , because i have nothing , am forgotten by every one .
" then the king felt compassion for him , and said , " thou shalt be raised from thy poverty , and shalt have such gifts from me that thou shalt be equal to thy rich brother ."
then he bestowed on him much gold , and lands , and meadows , and herds , and made him immensely rich , so that the wealth of the other brother could not be compared with his .
when the rich brother heard what the poor one had gained for himself with one single turnip , he envied him , and thought in every way how he also could get hold of a similar piece of luck .
he would , however , set about it in a much wiser way , and took gold and horses and carried them to the king , and made certain the king would give him a much larger present in return .
if his brother had got so much for one turnip , what would he not carry away with him in return for such beautiful things as these ?
the king accepted his present , and said he had nothing to give him in return that was more rare and excellent than the great turnip .
so the rich man was obliged to put his brother ' s turnip in a cart and have it taken to his home .
when there he did not know on whom to vent his rage and anger , until bad thoughts came to him , and he resolved to kill his brother .
he hired murderers , who were to lie in ambush , and then he went to his brother and said , " dear brother , i know of a hidden treasure , we will dig it up together , and divide it between us ."
the other agreed to this , and accompanied him without suspicion .
while they were on their way , however , the murderers fell on him , bound him , and would have hanged him to a tree .
but just as they were doing this , loud singing and the sound of a horse ' s feet were heard in the distance .
on this their hearts were filled with terror , and they pushed their prisoner head first into the sack , hung it on a branch , and took to flight .
he , however , worked up there until he had made a hole in the sack through which he could put his head .
the man who was coming by was no other than a travelling student , a young fellow who rode on his way through the wood joyously singing his song .
when he who was aloft saw that someone was passing below him , he cried , " good day !
you have come at a lucky time ."
the student looked round on every side , but did not know whence the voice came .
at last he said , " who calls me ?"
then an answer came from the top of the tree , " raise your eyes ; here i sit aloft in the sack of wisdom .
in a short time have i learnt great things ; compared with this all schools are a jest ; in a very short time i shall have learnt everything , and shall descend wiser than all other men .
i understand the stars , and the signs of the zodiac , and the tracks of the winds , the sand of the sea , the healing of illness , and the virtues of all herbs , birds , and stones .
if you were once within it you would feel what noble things issue forth from the sack of knowledge .
" the student , when he heard all this , was astonished , and said , " blessed be the hour in which i have found thee !
may not i also enter the sack for a while ?"
he who was above replied as if unwillingly , " for a short time i will let you get into it , if you reward me and give me good words ; but you must wait an hour longer , for one thing remains which i must learn before i do it ."
when the student had waited a while he became impatient , and begged to be allowed to get in at once , his thirst for knowledge was so very great .
so he who was above pretended at last to yield , and said , " in order that i may come forth from the house of knowledge you must let it down by the rope , and then you shall enter it ."
so the student let the sack down , untied it , and set him free , and then cried , " now draw me up at once ," and was about to get into the sack .
" halt !"
said the other , " that won ' t do ," and took him by the head and put him upside down into the sack , fastened it , and drew the disciple of wisdom up the tree by the rope .
then he swung him in the air and said , " how goes it with thee , my dear fellow ?
behold , already thou feelest wisdom coming , and art gaining valuable experience .
keep perfectly quiet until thou becomest wiser ."
thereupon he mounted the student ' s horse and rode away , but in an hour ' s time sent some one to let the student out again .
