in the time when our lord still walked this earth , he and st . peter stopped one evening at a smith ' s and received free quarters .
then it came to pass that a poor beggar , hardly pressed by age and infirmity , came to this house and begged alms of the smith .
st . peter had compassion on him and said , " lord and master , if it please thee , cure his torments that he may be able to win his own bread ."
the lord said kindly , " smith , lend me thy forge , and put on some coals for me , and then i will make this ailing old man young again ."
the smith was quite willing , and st . peter blew the bellows , and when the coal fire sparkled up large and high our lord took the little old man , pushed him in the forge in the midst of the red - hot fire , so that he glowed like a rose - bush , and praised god with a loud voice .
after that the lord went to the quenching tub , put the glowing little man into it so that the water closed over him , and after he had carefully cooled him , gave him his blessing , when behold the little man sprang nimbly out , looking fresh , straight , healthy , and as if he were but twenty .
the smith , who had watched everything closely and attentively , invited them all to supper .
he , however , had an old half - blind crooked , mother - in - law who went to the youth , and with great earnestness asked if the fire had burnt him much .
he answered that he had never felt more comfortable , and that he had sat in the red heat as if he had been in cool dew .
the youth ' s words echoed in the ears of the old woman all night long , and early next morning , when the lord had gone on his way again and had heartily thanked the smith , the latter thought he might make his old mother - in - law young again likewise , as he had watched everything so carefully , and it lay in the province of his trade .
so he called to ask her if she , too , would like to go bounding about like a girl of eighteen .
she said , " with all my heart , as the youth has come out of it so well ."
so the smith made a great fire , and thrust the old woman into it , and she writhed about this way and that , and uttered terrible cries of murder .
" sit still ; why art thou screaming and jumping about so ?"
cried he , and as he spoke he blew the bellows again until all her rags were burnt .
the old woman cried without ceasing , and the smith thought to himself , " i have not quite the right art ," and took her out and threw her into the cooling - tub .
then she screamed so loudly that the smith ' s wife upstairs and her daughter - in - law heard , and they both ran downstairs , and saw the old woman lying in a heap in the quenching - tub , howling and screaming , with her face wrinkled and shrivelled and all out of shape .
thereupon the two , who were both with child , were so terrified that that very night two boys were born who were not made like men but apes , and they ran into the woods , and from them sprang the race of apes .
