near a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter and his wife , and his two children ; the boy ' s name was hansel and the girl ' s grethel .
they had very little to bite or to sup , and once , when there was great dearth in the land , the man could not even gain the daily bread .
as he lay in bed one night thinking of this , and turning and tossing , he sighed heavily , and said to his wife , " what will become of us ?
we cannot even feed our children ; there is nothing left for ourselves .
"" i will tell you what , husband ," answered the wife ; " we will take the children early in the morning into the forest , where it is thickest ; we will make them a fire , and we will give each of them a piece of bread , then we will go to our work and leave them alone ; they will never find the way home again , and we shall be quit of them .
"" no , wife ," said the man , " i cannot do that ; i cannot find in my heart to take my children into the forest and to leave them there alone ; the wild animals would soon come and devour them ."
- " o you fool ," said she , " then we will all four starve ; you had better get the coffins ready ," and she left him no peace until he consented .
" but i really pity the poor children ," said the man . the two children had not been able to sleep for hunger , and had heard what their step - mother had said to their father .
grethel wept bitterly , and said to hansel , " it is all over with us .
"" do be quiet , grethel ," said hansel , " and do not fret ; 1 will manage something ."
and when the parents had gone to sleep he got up , put on his little coat , opened the back door , and slipped out .
the moon was shining brightly , and the white flints that lay in front of the house glistened like pieces of silver .
hansel stooped and filled the little pocket of his coat as full as it would hold .
then he went back again , and said to grethel , " be easy , dear little sister , and go to sleep quietly ; god will not forsake us ," and laid himself down again in his bed .
when the day was breaking , and before the sun had risen , the wife came and awakened the two children , saying , " get up , you lazy bones ; we are going into the forest to cut wood ."
then she gave each of them a piece of bread , and said , " that is for dinner , and you must not eat it before then , for you will get no more ."
grethel carried the bread under her apron , for hansel had his pockets full of the flints .
then they set off all together on their way to the forest .
when they had gone a little way hansel stood still and looked back towards the house , and this he did again and again , till his father said to him , " hansel , what are you looking at ?
take care not to forget your legs .
"" o father ," said hansel , " lam looking at my little white kitten , who is sitting up on the roof to bid me good - bye ."
- " you young fool ," said the woman , " that is not your kitten , but the sunshine on the chimney - pot ."
of course hansel had not been looking at his kitten , but had been taking every now and then a flint from his pocket and dropping it on the road .
when they reached the middle of the forest the father told the children to collect wood to make a fire to keep them , warm ; and hansel and grethel gathered brushwood enough for a little mountain j and it was set on fire , and when the flame was burning quite high the wife said , " now lie down by the fire and rest yourselves , you children , and we will go and cut wood ; and when we are ready we will come and fetch you .
" so hansel and grethel sat by the fire , and at noon they each ate their pieces of bread .
they thought their father was in the wood all the time , as they seemed to hear the strokes of the axe : but really it was only a dry branch hanging to a withered tree that the wind moved to and fro .
so when they had stayed there a long time their eyelids closed with weariness , and they fell fast asleep . when at last they woke it was night , and grethel began to cry , and said , " how shall we ever get out of this wood ?
" but hansel comforted her , saying , " wait a little while longer , until the moon rises , and then we can easily find the way home ."
and when the full moon got up hansel took his little sister by the hand , and followed the way where the flint stones shone like silver , and showed them the road .
they walked on the whole night through , and at the break of day they came to their father ' s house .
they knocked at the door , and when the wife opened it and saw that it was hansel and grethel she said , " you naughty children , why did you sleep so long in the wood ?
we thought you were never coming home again !"
but the father was glad , for it had gone to his heart to leave them both in the woods alone . not very long after that there was again great scarcity in those parts , and the children heard their mother say at night in bed to their father , " everything is finished up ; we have only half a loaf , and after that the tale comes to an end .
the children must be off ; we will take them farther into the wood this time , so that they shall not be able to find the way back again ; there is no other way to manage ."
the man felt sad at heart , and he thought , " it would better to share one ' s last morsel with one ' s children ."
but the wife would listen to nothing that he said , but scolded and reproached him .
he who says a must say b too , and when a man has given in once he has to do it a second time . but the children were not asleep , and had heard all the talk .
when the parents had gone to sleep hansel got up to go out and get more flint stones , as he did before , but the wife had locked the door , and hansel could not get out ; but he comforted his little sister , and said , " don ' t cry , grethel , and go to sleep quietly , and god will help us ."
early the next morning the wife came and pulled the children out of bed .
she gave them each a little piece of " bread - less than before ; and on the way to the wood hansel crumbled the bread in his pocket , and often stopped to throw a crumb on the ground .
" hansel , what are you stopping behind and staring for ?"
said the father .
" i am looking at my little pigeon sitting on the roof , to say good - bye to me ," answered hansel .
" you fool ," said the wife , " that is no pigeon , but the morning sun shining on the chimney pots ."
hansel went on as before , and strewed bread crumbs all along the road .
the woman led the children far into the wood , where they had never been before in all their lives .
and again there was a large fire made , and the mother said , " sit still there , you children , and when you are tired you can go to sleep ; we are going into the forest to cut wood , and in the evening , when we are ready to go home we will come and fetch you .
" so when noon came grethel shared her bread with hansel , who had strewed his along the road .
then they went to sleep , and the evening passed , and no one came for the poor children .
when they awoke it was dark night , and hansel comforted his little sister , and said , " wait a little , grethel , until the moon gets up , then we shall be able to see the way home by the crumbs of bread that i have scattered along it .
" so when the moon rose they got up , but they could find no crumbs of bread , for the birds of the woods and of the fields had come and picked them up .
hansel thought they might find the way all the same , but they could not .
they went on all that night , and the next day from the morning until the evening , but they could not find the way out of the wood , and they were very hungry , for they had nothing to eat but the few berries they could pick up .
and when they were so tired that they could no longer drag themselves along , they lay down under a tree and fell asleep . it was now the third morning since they had left their father ' s house .
they were always trying to get back to it , but instead of that they only found themselves farther in the wood , and if help had not soon come they would have been starved . about noon they saw a pretty snow - white bird sitting on a bough , and singing so sweetly that they stopped to listen .
and when he had finished the bird spread his wings and flew before them , and they followed after him until they came to a little house , and the bird perched on the roof , and when they came nearer they saw that the house was built of bread , and roofed with cakes ; and the window was of transparent sugar .
" we will have some of this ," said hansel , " and make a fine meal .
i will eat a piece of the roof , grethel , and you can have some of the window - that will taste sweet ."
so hansel reached up and broke off a bit of the roof , just to see how it tasted , and grethel stood by the window and gnawed at it .
then they heard a thin voice call out from inside ," nibble , nibble , like a mouse , who is nibbling at my house ?
" and the children answered ," never mind , it is the wind .
" and they went on eating , never disturbing themselves .
hansel , who found that the roof tasted very nice , took down a great piece of it , and grethel pulled out a large round window - pane , and sat her down and began upon it . then the door opened , and an aged woman came out , leaning upon a crutch .
hansel and grethel felt very frightened , and let fall what they had in their hands .
the old woman , however , nodded her head , and said , " ah , my dear children , how come you here ?
you must come indoors and stay with me , you will be no trouble ."
so she took them each by the hand , and led them into her little house .
and there they found a good meal laid out , of milk and pancakes , with sugar , apples , and nuts .
after that she showed them two little white beds , and hansel and grethel laid themselves down on them , and thought they were in heaven . the old woman , although her behaviour was so kind , was a wicked witch , who lay in wait for children , and had built the little house on purpose to entice them .
when they were once inside she used to kill them , cook them , and eat them , and then it was a feast day with her .
the witch ' s eyes were red , and she could not see very far , but she had a keen scent , like the beasts , and knew very well when human creatures were near .
when she knew that hansel and grethel were coming , she gave a spiteful laugh , and said triumphantly , " i have them , and they shall not escape me !
" early in the morning , before the children were awake , she got up to look at them , and as they lay sleeping so peacefully with round rosy cheeks , she said to herself , " what a fine feast i shall have !"
then she grasped hansel with her withered hand , and led him into a little stable , and shut him up behind a grating ; and call and scream as he might , it was no good .
then she went back to grethel and shook her , crying , " get up , lazy bones ; fetch water , and cook something nice for your brother ; he is outside in the stable , and must be fattened up .
and when he is fat enough i will eat him ."
grethel began to weep bitterly , but it was of no use , she had to do what the wicked witch bade her .
and so the best kind of victuals was cooked for poor hansel , while grethel got nothing but crab - shells . each morning the old woman visited the little stable , and cried , " hansel , stretch out your finger , that i may tell if you will soon be fat enough ."
hansel , however , used to hold out a little bone , and the old woman , who had weak eyes , could not see what it was , and supposing it to be hansel ' s finger , wondered very much that it was not getting fatter . when four weeks had passed and hansel seemed to remain so thin , she lost patience and could wait no longer .
" now then , grethel ," cried she to the little girl ; " be quick and draw water ; be hansel fat or be he lean , tomorrow i must kill and cook him ."
oh what a grief for the poor little sister to have to fetch water , and how the tears flowed down over her cheeks !
" dear god , pray help us !"
cried she ; " if we had been devoured by wild beasts in the wood at least we should have died together .
"" spare me your lamentations ," said the old woman ; " they are of no avail ."
early next morning grethel had to get up , make the fire , and fill the kettle .
" first we will do the baking ," said the old woman ; " i nave heated the oven already , and kneaded the dough ."
she pushed poor grethel towards the oven , out of which the flames were already shining .
" creep in ," said the witch , " and see if it is properly hot , so that the bread may be baked ."
and grethel once in , she meant to shut the door upon her and let her be baked , and then she would have eaten her .
but grethel perceived her intention , and said , " i don ' t know how to do it : how shall i get in ?
"" stupid goose ," said the old woman , " the opening is big enough , do you see ?
i could get in myself !"
and she stooped down and put her head in the oven ' s mouth .
then grethel gave her a push , so that she went in farther , and she shut the iron door upon her , and put up the bar .
oh how frightfully she howled !
but grethel ran away , and left the wicked witch to burn miserably . grethel went straight to hansel , opened the stable - door , and cried , " hansel , we are free !
the old witch is dead !"
then out flew hansel like a bird from its cage as soon as the door is opened .
how rejoiced they both were !
how they fell each on the other ' s neck !
and danced about , and kissed each other !
and as they had nothing more to fear they went over all the old witch ' s house , and in every corner there stood chests of pearls and precious stones .
" this is something better than flint stones ," said hansel , as he filled his pockets , and grethel , thinking she also would like to carry something home with her , filled her apron full .
i !
now , away we go ," said hansel , " if we only can get out of the witch ' s wood ."
when they had journeyed a few hours they came to a great piece of water .
" we can never get across this ," said hansel , " i see no stepping - stones and no bridge .
"" and there is no boat either ," said grethel ; " but here comes a white duck ; if i ask her she will help us over ."
so she cried ," duck , duck , here we stand , hansel and grethel , on the land , stepping - stones and bridge we lack , carry us over on your nice white back .
" and the duck came accordingly , and hansel got upon her and told his sister to come too .
" no ," answered grethel , " that would be too hard upon the duck ; we can go separately , one after the other ."
and that was how it was managed , and after that they went on happily , until they came to the wood , and the way grew more and more familiar , till at last they saw in the distance their father ' s house .
then they ran till they came up to it , rushed in at the door , and fell on their father ' s neck .
the man had not had a quiet hour since he left his children in the wood ; but the wife was dead .
and when grethel opened her apron the pearls and precious stones were scattered all over the room , and hansel took one handful after another out of his pocket .
then was all care at an end , and they lived in great joy together .
my tale is done , there runs a mouse , whosoever catches it , may make himself a big fur cap out of it .
