there was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage .
in front of the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose - trees , one of which bore white and the other red roses .
she had two children who were like the two rose - trees , and one was called snow - white , and the other rose - red .
they were as good and happy , as busy and cheerful as ever two children in the world were , only snow - white was more quiet and gentle than rose - red .
rose - red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields seeking flowers and catching butterflies ; but snow - white sat at home with her mother , and helped her with her house - work , or read to her when there was nothing to do . the two children were so fond of each another that they always held each other by the hand when they went out together , and when snow - white said , " we will not leave each other ," rose - red answered , " never so long as we live ," and their mother would add , " what one has she must share with the other ."
they often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries , and no beasts did them any harm , but came close to them trustfully .
the little hare would eat a cabbage - leaf out of their hands , the roe grazed by their side , the stag leapt merrily by them , and the birds sat still upon the boughs , and sang whatever they knew . no mishap overtook them ; if they had stayed too late in the forest , and night came on , they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss , and slept until morning came , and their mother knew this and had no distress on their account . once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused them , they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near their bed .
he got up and looked quite kindly at them , but said nothing and went away into the forest .
and when they looked round they found that they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice , and would certainly have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces further .
and their mother told them that it must have been the angel who watches over good children . snow - white and rose - red kept their mother ' s little cottage so neat that it was a pleasure to look inside it .
in the summer rose - red took care of the house , and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother ' s bed before she awoke , in which was a rose from each tree .
in the winter snow - white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the wrekin .
the kettle was of copper and shone like gold , so brightly was it polished .
in the evening , when the snowflakes fell , the mother said , " go , snow - white , and bolt the door ," and then they sat round the hearth , and the mother took her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book , and the two girls listened as they sat and span .
and close by them lay a lamb upon the floor , and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head hidden beneath its wings .
one evening , as they were thus sitting comfortably together , some one knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in .
the mother said , " quick , rose - red , open the door , it must be a traveller who is seeking shelter ."
rose - red went and pushed back the bolt , thinking that it was a poor man , but it was not ; it was a bear that stretched his broad , black head within the door .
rose - red screamed and sprang back , the lamb bleated , the dove fluttered , and snow - white hid herself behind her mother ' s bed .
but the bear began to speak and said , " do not be afraid , i will do you no harm !
i am half - frozen , and only want to warm myself a little beside you .
"" poor bear ," said the mother , " lie down by the fire , only take care that you do not burn your coat ."
then she cried , " snow - white , rose - red , come out , the bear will do you no harm , he means well ."
so they both came out , and by - and - by the lamb and dove came nearer , and were not afraid of him .
the bear said , " here , children , knock the snow out of my coat a little ;" so they brought the broom and swept the bear ' s hide clean ; and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and comfortably .
it was not long before they grew quite at home , and played tricks with their clumsy guest .
they tugged his hair with their hands , put their feet upon his back and rolled him about , or they took a hazel - switch and beat him , and when he growled they laughed .
but the bear took it all in good part , only when they were too rough he called out , " leave me alive , children ," snowy - white , rosy - red , will you beat your lover dead ?
" when it was bed - time , and the others went to bed , the mother said to the bear , " you can lie there by the hearth , and then you will be safe from the cold and the bad weather ."
as soon as day dawned the two children let him out , and he trotted across the snow into the forest . henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time , laid himself down by the hearth , and let the children amuse themselves with him as much as they liked ; and they got so used to him that the doors were never fastened until their black friend had arrived . when spring had come and all outside was green , the bear said one morning to snow - white , " now i must go away , and cannot come back for the whole summer ."
- " where are you going , then , dear bear ?"
asked snow - white .
" i must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs .
in the winter , when the earth is frozen hard , they are obliged to stay below and cannot work their way through ; but now , when the sun has thawed and warmed the earth , they break through it , and come out to pry and steal ; and what once gets into their hands , and in their caves , does not easily see daylight again .
" snow - white was quite sorry for his going away , and as she unbolted the door for him , and the bear was hurrying out , he caught against the bolt and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off , and it seemed to snow - white as if she had seen gold shining through it , but she was not sure about it .
the bear ran away quickly , and was soon out of sight behind the trees . a short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest to get fire - wood .
there they found a big tree which lay felled on the ground , and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and forwards in the grass , but they could not make out what it was .
when they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a snow - white beard a yard long .
the end of the beard was caught in a crevice of the tree , and the little fellow was jumping backwards and forwards like a dog tied to a rope , and did not know what to do . he glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried , " why do you stand there ?
can you not come here and help me ?"
- " what are you about there , little man ?"
asked rose - red .
" you stupid , prying goose !"
answered the dwarf ; " i was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking .
the little bit of food that one of us wants gets burnt up directly with thick logs ; we do not swallow so much as you coarse , greedy folk .
i had just driven the wedge safely in , and everything was going as i wished ; but the wretched wood was too smooth and suddenly sprang asunder , and the tree closed so quickly that i could not pull out my beautiful white beard ; so now it is tight in and i cannot get away , and the silly , sleek , milk - faced things laugh !
ugh !
how odious you are !
" the children tried very hard , but they could not pull the beard out , it was caught too fast .
" i will run and fetch some one ," said rose - red .
" you senseless goose !"
snarled the dwarf ; why should you fetch some one ?
you are already two too many for me ; can you not think of something better ?"
- " don ' t be impatient ," said snow - white , " i will help you ," and she pulled her scissors out of her pocket , and cut off the end of the beard . as soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay amongst the roots of the tree , and which was full of gold , and lifted it up , grumbling to himself , " uncouth people , to cut off a piece of my fine beard .
bad luck to you !"
and then he swung the bag upon his back , and went off without even once looking at the children . some time after that snow - white and rose - red went to catch a dish of fish .
as they came near the brook they saw something like a large grasshopper jumping towards the water , as if it were going to leap in .
they ran to it and found it was the dwarf .
" where are you going ?"
said rose - red ; " you surely don ' t want to go into the water ?"
- " i am not such a fool !"
cried the dwarf ; don ' t you see that the accursed fish wants to pull me in ?"
the little man had been sitting there fishing , and unluckily the wind had twisted his beard with the fishing - line ; just then a big fish bit , and the feeble creature had not strength to pull it out ; the fish kept the upper hand and pulled the dwarf towards him .
he held on to all the reeds and rushes , but it was of little good , he was forced to follow the movements of the fish , and was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water . the girls came just in time ; they held him fast and tried to free his beard from the line , but all in vain , beard and line were entangled fast together .
nothing was left but to bring out the scissors and cut the beard , whereby a small part of it was lost .
when the dwarf saw that he screamed out , " is that civil , you toad - stool , to disfigure one ' s face ?
was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard ?
now you have cut off the best part of it .
i cannot let myself be seen by my people .
i wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes !"
then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes , and without saying a word more he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone . it happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the town to buy needles and thread , and laces and ribbons .
the road led them across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn here and there .
now they noticed a large bird hovering in the air , flying slowly round and round above them ; it sank lower and lower , and at last settled near a rock not far off .
directly afterwards they heard a loud , piteous cry .
they ran up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf , and was going to carry him off . the children , full of pity , at once took tight hold of the little man , and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go .
as soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried with his shrill voice , " could you not have done it more carefully !
you dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes , you helpless clumsy creatures !"
then he took up a sack full of precious stones , and slipped away again under the rock into his hole .
the girls , who by this time were used to his thanklessness , went on their way and did their business in the town . as they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the dwarf , who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot , and had not thought that anyone would come there so late .
the evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones ; they glittered and sparkled with all colors so beautifully that the children stood still and looked at them .
" why do you stand gaping there ?"
cried the dwarf , and his ashen - gray face became copper - red with rage .
he was going on with his bad words when a loud growling was heard , and a black bear came trotting towards them out of the forest .
the dwarf sprang up in a fright , but he could not get to his cave , for the bear was already close .
then in the dread of his heart he cried , " dear mr . bear , spare me , i will give you all my treasures ; look , the beautiful jewels lying there !
grant me my life ; what do you want with such a slender little fellow as i ?
you would not feel me between your teeth .
come , take these two wicked girls , they are tender morsels for you , fat as young quails ; for mercy ' s sake eat them !"
the bear took no heed of his words , but gave the wicked creature a single blow with his paw , and he did not move again . the girls had run away , but the bear called to them , " snow - white and rose - red , do not be afraid ; wait , i will come with you ."
then they knew his voice and waited , and when he came up to them suddenly his bearskin fell off , and he stood there , a handsome man , clothed all in gold .
" i am a king ' s son ," he said , " and i was bewitched by that wicked dwarf , who had stolen my treasures ; i have had to run about the forest as a savage bear until i was freed by his death .
now he has got his well - deserved punishment .
" snow - white was married to him , and rose - red to his brother , and they divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered together in his cave .
the old mother lived peacefully and happily with her children for many years .
she took the two rose - trees with her , and they stood before her window , and every year bore the most beautiful roses , white and red .
