let no one ever say that a poor tailor cannot do great things and win high honors ; all that is needed is that he should go to the right smithy , and what is of most consequence , that he should have good luck .
a civil , adroit tailor ' s apprentice once went out travelling , and came into a great forest , and , as he did not know the way , he lost himself .
night fell , and nothing was left for him to do , but to seek a bed in this painful solitude .
he might certainly have found a good bed on the soft moss , but the fear of wild beasts let him have no rest there , and at last he was forced to make up his mind to spend the night in a tree .
he sought out a high oak , climbed up to the top of it , and thanked god that he had his goose with him , for otherwise the wind which blew over the top of the tree would have carried him away . after he had spent some hours in the darkness , not without fear and trembling , he saw at a very short distance the glimmer of a light , and as he thought that a human habitation might be there , where he would be better off than on the branches of a tree , he got carefully down and went towards the light .
it guided him to a small hut that was woven together of reeds and rushes .
he knocked boldly , the door opened , and by the light which came forth he saw a little hoary old man who wore a coat made of bits of colored stuff sewn together .
" who are you , and what do you want ?"
asked the man in a grumbling voice .
" i am a poor tailor ," he answered , " whom night has surprised here in the wilderness , and i earnestly beg you to take me into your hut until morning ."
- " go your way ," replied the old man in a surly voice , " i will have nothing to do with runagates ; seek for yourself a shelter elsewhere ."
after these words he was about to slip into his hut again , but the tailor held him so tightly by the corner of his coat , and pleaded so piteously , that the old man , who was not so ill - natured as he wished to appear , was at last softened , and took him into the hut with him where he gave him something to eat , and then pointed out to him a very good bed in a corner . the weary tailor needed no rocking ; but slept sweetly till morning , but even then would not have thought of getting up , if he had not been aroused by a great noise .
a violent sound of screaming and roaring forced its way through the thin walls of the hut .
the tailor , full of unwonted courage , jumped up , put his clothes on in haste , and hurried out .
then close by the hut , he saw a great black bull and a beautiful stag , which were just preparing for a violent struggle .
they rushed at each other with such extreme rage that the ground shook with their trampling , and the air resounded with their cries .
for a long time it was uncertain which of the two would gain the victory ; at length the stag thrust his horns into his adversary ' s body , whereupon the bull fell to the earth with a terrific roar , and was thoroughly despatched by a few strokes from the stag . the tailor , who had watched the fight with astonishment , was still standing there motionless , when the stag in full career bounded up to him , and before he could escape , caught him up on his great horns .
he had not much time to collect his thoughts , for it went in a swift race over stock and stone , mountain and valley , wood and meadow .
he held with both hands to the tops of the horns , and resigned himself to his fate .
it seemed , however , to him just as if he were flying away .
at length the stag stopped in front of a wall of rock , and gently let the tailor down .
the tailor , more dead than alive , required a longer time than that to come to himself .
when he had in some degree recovered , the stag , which had remained standing by him , pushed its horns with such force against a door which was in the rock , that it sprang open .
flames of fire shot forth , after which followed a great smoke , which hid the stag from his sight .
the tailor did not know what to do , or whither to turn , in order to get out of this desert and back to human beings again .
whilst he was standing thus undecided , a voice sounded out of the rock , which cried to him , " enter without fear , no evil shall befall you thee ."
he hesitated , but driven by a mysterious force , he obeyed the voice and went through the iron - door into a large spacious hall , whose ceiling , walls and floor were made of shining polished square stones , on each of which were cut letters which were unknown to him .
he looked at everything full of admiration , and was on the point of going out again , when he once more heard the voice which said to him , " step on the stone which lies in the middle of the hall , and great good fortune awaits thee .
" his courage had already grown so great that he obeyed the order .
the stone began to give way under his feet , and sank slowly down into the depths .
when it was once more firm , and the tailor looked round , he found himself in a hall which in size resembled the former .
here , however , there was more to look at and to admire .
hollow places were cut in the walls , in which stood vases of transparent glass which were filled with colored spirit or with a bluish vapour .
on the floor of the hall two great glass chests stood opposite to each other , which at once excited his curiosity .
when he went to one of them he saw inside it a handsome structure like a castle surrounded by farm - buildings , stables and barns , and a quantity of other good things .
everything was small , but exceedingly carefully and delicately made , and seemed to be cut out by a dexterous hand with the greatest exactitude . he might not have turned away his eyes from the consideration of this rarity for some time , if the voice had not once more made itself heard .
it ordered him to turn round and look at the glass chest which was standing opposite .
how his admiration increased when he saw therein a maiden of the greatest beauty !
she lay as if asleep , and was wrapped in her long fair hair as in a precious mantle .
her eyes were closely shut , but the brightness of her complexion and a ribbon which her breathing moved to and fro , left no doubt that she was alive .
the tailor was looking at the beauty with beating heart , when she suddenly opened her eyes , and started up at the sight of him in joyful terror .
" just heaven !"
cried she , " my deliverance is at hand !
quick , quick , help me out of my prison ; if thou pushest back the bolt of this glass coffin , then i shall be free ."
the tailor obeyed without delay , and she immediately raised up the glass lid , came out and hastened into the corner of the hall , where she covered herself with a large cloak .
then she seated herself on a stone , ordered the young man to come to her , and after she had imprinted a friendly kiss on his lips , she said , " my long - desired deliverer , kind heaven has guided thee to me , and put an end to my sorrows .
on the self - same day when they end , shall thy happiness begin .
thou art the husband chosen for me by heaven , and shalt pass thy life in unbroken joy , loved by me , and rich to overflowing in every earthly possession .
seat thyself , and listen to the story of my life :" i am the daughter of a rich count .
my parents died when i was still in my tender youth , and recommended me in their last will to my elder brother , by whom i was brought up .
we loved each other so tenderly , and were so alike in our way of thinking and our inclinations , that we both embraced the resolution never to marry , but to stay together to the end of our lives .
in our house there was no lack of company ; neighbors and friends visited us often , and we showed the greatest hospitality to every one .
so it came to pass one evening that a stranger came riding to our castle , and , under pretext of not being able to get on to the next place , begged for shelter for the night .
we granted his request with ready courtesy , and he entertained us in the most agreeable manner during supper by conversation intermingled with stories .
my brother liked the stranger so much that he begged him to spend a couple of days with us , to which , after some hesitation , he consented .
we did not rise from table until late in the night , the stranger was shown to room , and i hastened , as i was tired , to lay my limbs in my soft bed .
hardly had i slept for a short time , when the sound of faint and delightful music awoke me .
as i could not conceive from whence it came , i wanted to summon my waiting - maid who slept in the next room , but to my astonishment i found that speech was taken away from me by an unknown force .
i felt as if a mountain were weighing down my breast , and was unable to make the very slightest sound .
in the meantime , by the light of my night - lamp , i saw the stranger enter my room through two doors which were fast bolted .
he came to me and said , that by magic arts which were at his command , he had caused the lovely music to sound in order to awaken me , and that he now forced his way through all fastenings with the intention of offering me his hand and heart .
my repugnance to his magic arts was , however , so great , that i vouchsafed him no answer .
he remained for a time standing without moving , apparently with the idea of waiting for a favorable decision , but as i continued to keep silence , he angrily declared he would revenge himself and find means to punish my pride , and left the room .
i passed the night in the greatest disquietude , and only fell asleep towards morning .
when i awoke , i hurried to my brother , but did not find him in his room , and the attendants told me that he had ridden forth with the stranger to the chase by daybreak .
" i at once suspected nothing good .
i dressed myself quickly , ordered my palfrey to be saddled , and accompanied only by one servant , rode full gallop to the forest .
the servant fell with his horse , and could not follow me , for the horse had broken its foot .
i pursued my way without halting , and in a few minutes i saw the stranger coming towards me with a beautiful stag which he led by a cord .
i asked him where he had left my brother , and how he had come by this stag , out of whose great eyes i saw tears flowing .
instead of answering me , he began to laugh loudly .
i fell into a great rage at this , pulled out a pistol and discharged it at the monster ; but the ball rebounded from his breast and went into my horse ' s head .
i fell to the ground , and the stranger muttered some words which deprived me of consciousness .
" when i came to my senses again i found myself in this underground cave in a glass coffin .
the magician appeared once again , and said he had changed my brother into a stag , my castle with all that belonged to it , diminished in size by his arts , he had shut up in the other glass chest , and my people , who were all turned into smoke , he had confined in glass bottles .
he told me that if i would now comply with his wish , it was an easy thing for him to put everything back in its former state , as he had nothing to do but open the vessels , and everything would return once more to its natural form .
i answered him as little as i had done the first time .
he vanished and left me in my prison , in which a deep sleep came on me .
amongst the visions which passed before my eyes , that was the most comforting in which a young man came and set me free , and when i opened my eyes to - day i saw thee , and beheld my dream fulfilled .
help me to accomplish the other things which happened in those visions .
the first is that we lift the glass chest in which my castle is enclosed , on to that broad stone .
" as soon as the stone was laden , it began to rise up on high with the maiden and the young man , and mounted through the opening of the ceiling into the upper hall , from whence they then could easily reach the open air .
here the maiden opened the lid , and it was marvellous to behold how the castle , the houses , and the farm buildings which were enclosed , stretched themselves out and grew to their natural size with the greatest rapidity .
after this , the maiden and the tailor returned to the cave beneath the earth , and had the vessels which were filled with smoke carried up by the stone .
the maiden had scarcely opened the bottles when the blue smoke rushed out and changed itself into living men , in whom she recognized her servants and her people .
her joy was still more increased when her brother , who had killed the magician in the form of the bull , came out of the forest towards them in his human form , and on the self - same day the maiden , in accordance with her promise , gave her hand at the altar to the lucky tailor .
