there was once upon a time a king , but where he reigned and what he was called , i do not know .
he had no son , but an only daughter who had always been ill , and no doctor had been able to cure her .
then it was foretold to the king that his daughter should eat herself well with an apple .
so he ordered it to be proclaimed throughout the whole of his kingdom , that whosoever brought his daughter an apple with which she could eat herself well , should have her to wife , and be king .
this became known to a peasant who had three sons , and he said to the eldest , " go out into the garden and take a basketful of those beautiful apples with the red cheeks and carry them to the court ; perhaps the king ' s daughter will be able to eat herself well with them , and then thou wilt marry her and be king ."
the lad did so , and set out . when he had gone a short way he met a little iron man who asked him what he had there in the basket , to which replied uele , for so was he named , " frogs ' legs ."
on this the little man said , " well , so shall it be , and remain ," and went away .
at length uele arrived at the palace , and made it known that he had brought apples which would cure the king ' s daughter if she ate them .
this delighted the king hugely , and he caused uele to be brought before him ; but , alas !
when he opened the basket , instead of having apples in it he had frogs ' legs which were still kicking about .
on this the king grew angry , and had him driven out of the house .
when he got home he told his father how it had fared with him .
then the father sent the next son , who was called seame , but all went with him just as it had gone with uele .
he also met the little iron man , who asked what he had there in the basket .
seame said , " hogs ' bristles ," and the iron man said , " well , so shall it be , and remain ."
when seame got to the king ' s palace and said he brought apples with which the king ' s daughter might eat herself well , they did not want to let him go in , and said that one fellow had already been there , and had treated them as if they were fools .
seame , however , maintained that he certainly had the apples , and that they ought to let him go in .
at length they believed him , and led him to the king .
but when he uncovered the basket , he had but hogs ' bristles .
this enraged the king most terribly , so he caused seame to be whipped out of the house .
when he got home he related all that had befallen him , then the youngest boy , whose name was hans , but who was always called stupid hans , came and asked his father if he might go with some apples .
" oh !"
said the father , " thou wouldst be just the right fellow for such a thing !
if the clever ones can ' t manage it , what canst thou do ?"
the boy , however , did not believe him , and said , " indeed , father , i wish to go ."
- " just get away , thou stupid fellow , thou must wait till thou art wiser ," said the father to that , and turned his back .
hans , however , pulled at the back of his smock - frock and said , " indeed , father , i wish to go ."
- " well , then , so far as i am concerned thou mayst go , but thou wilt soon come home again !"
replied the old man in a spiteful voice .
the boy , however , was tremendously delighted and jumped for joy .
" well , act like a fool !
thou growest more stupid every day !"
said the father again .
hans , however , did not care about that , and did not let it spoil his pleasure , but as it was then night , he thought he might as well wait until the morrow , for he could not get to court that day .
all night long he could not sleep in his bed , and if he did doze for a moment , he dreamt of beautiful maidens , of palaces , of gold , and of silver , and all kinds of things of that sort .
early in the morning , he went forth on his way , and directly afterwards the little shabby - looking man in his iron clothes , came to him and asked what he was carrying in the basket .
hans gave him the answer that he was carrying apples with which the king ' s daughter was to eat herself well .
" then ," said the little man , " so shall they be , and remain ."
but at the court they would none of them let hans go in , for they said two had already been there who had told them that they were bringing apples , and one of them had frogs ' legs , and the other hogs ' bristles .
hans , however , resolutely maintained that he most certainly had no frogs ' legs , but some of the most beautiful apples in the whole kingdom .
as he spoke so pleasantly , the door - keeper thought he could not be telling a lie , and asked him to go in , and he was right , for when hans uncovered his basket in the king ' s presence , golden - yellow apples came tumbling out .
the king was delighted , and caused some of them to be taken to his daughter , and then waited in anxious expectation until news should be brought to him of the effect they had .
but before much time had passed by , news was brought to him : but who do you think it was who came ?
it was his daughter herself !
as soon as she had eaten of those apples , she was cured , and sprang out of her bed .
the joy the king felt cannot be described !
but now he did not want to give his daughter in marriage to hans , and said he must first make him a boat which would go quicker on dry land than on water .
hans agreed to the conditions , and went home , and related how it had fared with him .
then the father sent uele into the forest to make a boat of that kind .
he worked diligently , and whistled all the time .
at mid - day , when the sun was at the highest , came the little iron man and asked what he was making ?
uele gave him for answer , " wooden bowls for the kitchen ."
the iron man said , " so it shall be , and remain ."
by evening uele thought he had now made the boat , but when he wanted to get into it , he had nothing but wooden bowls .
the next day seame went into the forest , but everything went with him just as it had done with uele .
on the third day stupid hans went .
he worked away most industriously , so that the whole forest resounded with the heavy strokes , and all the while he sang and whistled right merrily .
at mid - day , when it was the hottest , the little man came again , and asked what he was making ?
" a boat which will go quicker on dry land than on the water ," replied hans , " and when i have finished it , i am to have the king ' s daughter for my wife ."
- " well ," said the little man , " such an one shall it be , and remain ."
in the evening , when the sun had turned into gold , hans finished his boat , and all that was wanted for it .
he got into it and rowed to the palace .
the boat went as swiftly as the wind .
the king saw it from afar , but would not give his daughter to hans yet , and said he must first take a hundred hares out to pasture from early morning until late evening , and if one of them got away , he should not have his daughter .
hans was contented with this , and the next day went with his flock to the pasture , and took great care that none of them ran away . before many hours had passed came a servant from the palace , and told hans that he must give her a hare instantly , for some visitors had come unexpectedly .
hans , however , was very well aware what that meant , and said he would not give her one ; the king might set some hare soup before his guest next day .
the maid , however , would not believe in his refusal , and at last she began to get angry with him .
then hans said that if the king ' s daughter came herself , he would give her a hare .
the maid told this in the palace , and the daughter did go herself .
in the meantime , however , the little man came again to hans , and asked him what he was doing there ?
he said he had to watch over a hundred hares and see that none of them ran away , and then he might marry the king ' s daughter and be king .
" good ," said the little man , " there is a whistle for thee , and if one of them runs away , just whistle with it , and then it will come back again ."
when the king ' s daughter came , hans gave her a hare into her apron ; but when she had gone about a hundred steps with it , he whistled , and the hare jumped out of the apron , and before she could turn round was back to the flock again .
when the evening came the hare - herd whistled once more , and looked to see if all were there , and then drove them to the palace .
the king wondered how hans had been able to take a hundred hares to graze without losing any of them ; he would , however , not give him his daughter yet , and said he must now bring him a feather from the griffin ' s tail .
hans set out at once , and walked straight forwards .
in the evening he came to a castle , and there he asked for a night ' s lodging , for at that time there were no inns .
the lord of the castle promised him that with much pleasure , and asked where he was going ?
hans answered , " to the griffin ."
- " oh !
to the griffin !
they tell me he knows everything , and i have lost the key of an iron money - chest ; so you might be so good as to ask him where it is ."
- " yes , indeed ," said hans , " i will do that ."
early the next morning he went onwards , and on his way arrived at another castle in which he again stayed the night .
when the people who lived there learnt that he was going to the griffin , they said they had in the house a daughter who was ill , and that they had already tried every means to cure her , but none of them had done her any good , and he might be so kind as to ask the griffin what would make their daughter healthy again ?
hans said he would willingly do that , and went onwards .
then he came to a lake , and instead of a ferry - boat , a tall , tall man was there who had to carry everybody across .
the man asked hans whither he was journeying ?
" to the griffin ," said hans .
" then when you get to him ," said the man , " just ask him why i am forced to carry everybody over the lake ."
- " yes , indeed , most certainly i ' ll do that ," said hans .
then the man took him up on his shoulders , and carried him across .
at length hans arrived at the griffin ' s house , but the wife only was at home , and not the griffin himself .
then the woman asked him what he wanted ?
thereupon he told her everything ;-- that he had to get a feather out of the griffin ' s tail , and that there was a castle where they had lost the key of their money - chest , and he was to ask the griffin where it was ?-- that in another castle the daughter was ill , and he was to learn what would cure her ?-- and then not far from thence there was a lake and a man beside it , who was forced to carry people across it , and he was very anxious to learn why the man was obliged to do it .
then said the woman , " but look here , my good friend , no christian can speak to the griffin ; he devours them all ; but if you like , you can lie down under his bed , and in the night , when he is quite fast asleep , you can reach out and pull a feather out of his tail , and as for those things which you are to learn , i will ask about them myself ."
hans was quite satisfied with this , and got under the bed .
in the evening , the griffin came home , and as soon as he entered the room , said , " wife , i smell a christian ."
- " yes ," said the woman , " one was here to - day , but he went away again ;" and on that the griffin said no more . in the middle of the night when the griffin was snoring loudly , hans reached out and plucked a feather from his tail .
the griffin woke up instantly , and said , " wife , i smell a christian , and it seems to me that somebody was pulling at my tail ."
his wife said , " thou hast certainly been dreaming , and i told thee before that a christian was here to - day , but that he went away again .
he told me all kinds of things that in one castle they had lost the key of their money - chest , and could find it nowhere ."
- " oh !
the fools !"
said the griffin ; " the key lies in the wood - house under a log of wood behind the door ."
- " and then he said that in another castle the daughter was ill , and they knew no remedy that would cure her ."
- " oh !
the fools !"
said the griffin ; " under the cellar - steps a toad has made its nest of her hair , and if she got her hair back she would be well ."
- " and then he also said that there was a place where there was a lake and a man beside it who was forced to carry everybody across ."
- " oh , the fool !"
said the griffin ; " if he only put one man down in the middle , he would never have to carry another across ."
early the next morning the griffin got up and went out .
then hans came forth from under the bed , and he had a beautiful feather , and had heard what the griffin had said about the key , and the daughter , and the ferry - man .
the griffin ' s wife repeated it all once more to him that he might not forget it , and then he went home again .
first he came to the man by the lake , who asked him what the griffin had said , but hans replied that he must first carry him across , and then he would tell him .
so the man carried him across , and when he was over hans told him that all he had to do was to set one person down in the middle of the lake , and then he would never have to carry over any more .
the man was hugely delighted , and told hans that out of gratitude he would take him once more across , and back again .
but hans said no , he would save him the trouble , he was quite satisfied already , and pursued his way .
then he came to the castle where the daughter was ill ; he took her on his shoulders , for she could not walk , and carried her down the cellar - steps and pulled out the toad ' s nest from beneath the lowest step and gave it into her hand , and she sprang off his shoulder and up the steps before him , and was quite cured .
then were the father and mother beyond measure rejoiced , and they gave hans gifts of gold and of silver , and whatsoever else he wished for , that they gave him .
and when he got to the other castle he went at once into the wood - house , and found the key under the log of wood behind the door , and took it to the lord of the castle .
he also was not a little pleased , and gave hans as a reward much of the gold that was in the chest , and all kinds of things besides , such as cows , and sheep , and goats .
when hans arrived before the king , with all these things -- with the money , and the gold , and the silver and the cows , sheep and goats , the king asked him how he had come by them .
then hans told him that the griffin gave every one whatsoever he wanted .
so the king thought he himself could make such things useful , and set out on his way to the griffin ; but when he got to the lake , it happened that he was the very first who arrived there after hans , and the man put him down in the middle of it and went away , and the king was drowned .
hans , however , married the daughter , and became king .
