was of a very different way of thinking from lazy harry and fat trina , who never let anything disturb their peace .
she scoured everything with ashes , from morning till evening , and burdened her husband , long laurence , with so much work that he had heavier weights to carry than an ass with three sacks .
it was , however , all to no purpose , they had nothing and came to nothing .
one night as she lay in bed , and could hardly move one limb for weariness , she still did not allow her thoughts to go to sleep .
she thrust her elbows into her husband ' s side , and said , " listen , lenz , to what i have been thinking : if i were to find one florin and one was given to me , i would borrow another to put to them , and thou too shouldst give me another , and then as soon as i had got the four florins together , i would buy a young cow ."
this pleased the husband right well .
" it is true ," said he , " that i do not know where i am to get the florin which thou wantest as a gift from me ; but , if thou canst get the money together , and canst buy a cow with it , thou wilt do well to carry out thy project .
i shall be glad ," he added , " if the cow has a calf , and then i shall often get a drink of milk to refresh me ."
- " the milk is not for thee ," said the woman , " we must let the calf suck that it may become big and fat , and we may be able to sell it well ."
- " certainly ," replied the man , " but still we will take a little milk ; that will do no harm ."
- " who has taught thee to manage cows ?"
said the woman ; " whether it does harm or not , i will not allow it , and even if thou wert to stand on thy head for it , thou shouldst not have a drop of the milk !
dost thou think , because there is no satisfying thee , long laurence , that thou art to eat up what i earn with so much difficulty ?"
- " wife ," said the man , " be quiet , or i will give thee a blow on thy mouth !"
- " what !"
cried she , " thou threatenest me , thou glutton , thou rascal , thou lazy harry !"
she was just laying hold of his hair , but long laurence got up , seized both lean lisa ' s withered arms in one hand , and with the other he pressed down her head into the pillow , let her scold , and held her until she fell asleep for very weariness .
whether she continued to wrangle when she awoke next morning , or whether she went out to look for the florin which she wanted to find , that i know not .
