a long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdom through all the land .
nothing was hidden from him , and it seemed as if news of the most secret things was brought to him through the air .
but he had a strange custom ; every day after dinner , when the table was cleared , and no one else was present , a trusty servant had to bring him one more dish .
it was covered , however , and even the servant did not know what was in it , neither did anyone know , for the king never took off the cover to eat of it until he was quite alone .
this had gone on for a long time , when one day the servant , who took away the dish , was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help carrying the dish into his room .
when he had carefully locked the door , he lifted up the cover , and saw a white snake lying on the dish .
but when he saw it he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it , so he cut off a little bit and put it into his mouth .
no sooner had it touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices outside his window .
he went and listened , and then noticed that it was the sparrows who were chattering together , and telling one another of all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields and woods .
eating the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals . now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most beautiful ring , and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty servant , who was allowed to go everywhere .
the king ordered the man to be brought before him , and threatened with angry words that unless he could before the morrow point out the thief , he himself should be looked upon as guilty and executed .
in vain he declared his innocence ; he was dismissed with no better answer .
in his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought how to help himself out of his trouble .
now some ducks were sitting together quietly by a brook and taking their rest ; and , whilst they were making their feathers smooth with their bills , they were having a confidential conversation together .
the servant stood by and listened .
they were telling one another of all the places where they had been waddling about all the morning , and what good food they had found , and one said in a pitiful tone , " something lies heavy on my stomach ; as i was eating in haste i swallowed a ring which lay under the queen ' s window ."
the servant at once seized her by the neck , carried her to the kitchen , and said to the cook , " here is a fine duck ; pray , kill her ."
- " yes ," said the cook , and weighed her in his hand ; " she has spared no trouble to fatten herself , and has been waiting to be roasted long enough ."
so he cut off her head , and as she was being dressed for the spit , the queen ' s ring was found inside her .
the servant could now easily prove his innocence ; and the king , to make amends for the wrong , allowed him to ask a favour , and promised him the best place in the court that he could wish for . the servant refused everything , and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling , as he had a mind to see the world and go about a little .
when his request was granted he set out on his way , and one day came to a pond , where he saw three fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water .
now , though it is said that fishes are dumb , he heard them lamenting that they must perish so miserably , and , as he had a kind heart , he got off his horse and put the three prisoners back into the water .
they quivered with delight , put out their heads , and cried to him , " we will remember you and repay you for saving us !"
he rode on , and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in the sand at his feet .
he listened , and heard an ant - king complain , " why cannot folks , with their clumsy beasts , keep off our bodies ?
that stupid horse , with his heavy hoofs , has been treading down my people without mercy !"
so he turned on to a side path and the ant - king cried out to him , ' we will remember you - one good turn deserves another !"
the path led him into a wood , and here he saw two old ravens standing by their nest , and throwing out their young ones .
" out with you , you idle , good - for - nothing creatures !"
cried they ; " we cannot find food for you any longer ; you are big enough , and can provide for yourselves ."
but the poor young ravens lay upon the ground , flapping their wings , and crying , " oh , what helpless chicks we are !
we must shift for ourselves , and yet we cannot fly !
what can we do , but lie here and starve ?"
so the good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword , and gave it to them for food .
then they came hopping up to it , satisfied their hunger , and cried , " we will remember you - one good turn deserves another !
" and now he had to use his own legs , and when he had walked a long way , he came to a large city .
there was a great noise and crowd in the streets , and a man rode up on horseback , crying aloud , " the king ' s daughter wants a husband ; but whoever sues for her hand must perform a hard task , and if he does not succeed he will forfeit his life ."
many had already made the attempt , but in vain ; nevertheless when the youth saw the king ' s daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty that he forgot all danger , went before the king , and declared himself a suitor . so he was led out to the sea , and a gold ring was thrown into it , in his sight ; then the king ordered him to fetch this ring up from the bottom of the sea , and added , " if you come up again without it you will be thrown in again and again until you perish amid the waves ."
all the people grieved for the handsome youth ; then they went away , leaving him alone by the sea .
he stood on the shore and considered what he should do , when suddenly he saw three fishes come swimming towards him , and they were the very fishes whose lives he had saved .
the one in the middle held a mussel in its mouth , which it laid on the shore at the youth ' s feet , and when he had taken it up and opened it , there lay the gold ring in the shell .
full of joy he took it to the king , and expected that he would grant him the promised reward .
but when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal in birth , she scorned him , and required him first to perform another task .
she went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten sacks - full of millet - seed on the grass ; then she said , " to - morrow morning before sunrise these must be picked up , and not a single grain be wanting ."
the youth sat down in the garden and considered how it might be possible to perform this task , but he could think of nothing , and there he sat sorrowfully awaiting the break of day , when he should be led to death .
but as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden he saw all the ten sacks standing side by side , quite full , and not a single grain was missing .
the ant - king had come in the night with thousands and thousands of ants , and the grateful creatures had by great industry picked up all the millet - seed and gathered them into the sacks .
presently the king ' s daughter herself came down into the garden , and was amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given him .
but she could not yet conquer her proud heart , and said , " although he has performed both the tasks , he shall not be my husband until he has brought me an apple from the tree of life ."
the youth did not know where the tree of life stood , but he set out , and would have gone on for ever , as long as his legs would carry him , though he had no hope of finding it .
after he had wandered through three kingdoms , he came one evening to a wood , and lay down under a tree to sleep .
but he heard a rustling in the branches , and a golden apple fell into his hand .
at the same time three ravens flew down to him , perched themselves upon his knee , and said , " we are the three young ravens whom you saved from starving ; when we had grown big , and heard that you were seeking the golden apple , we flew over the sea to the end of the world , where the tree of life stands , and have brought you the apple ."
the youth , full of joy , set out homewards , and took the golden apple to the king ' s beautiful daughter , who had no more excuses left to make .
they cut the apple of life in two and ate it together ; and then her heart became full of love for him , and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age .
