two or three hundred years ago , when people were far from being so crafty and cunning as they are now - a - day , an extraordinary event took place in a little town .
by some mischance one of the great owls , called horned owls , had come from the neighboring woods into the barn of one of the townsfolk in the night - time , and when day broke did not dare to venture forth again from her retreat , for fear of the other birds , which raised a terrible outcry whenever she appeared .
in the morning when the man - servant went into the barn to fetch some straw , he was so mightily alarmed at the sight of the owl sitting there in a corner , that he ran away and announced to his master that a monster , the like of which he had never set eyes on in his life , and which could devour a man without the slightest difficulty , was sitting in the barn , rolling its eyes about in its head .
" i know you already ," said the master , " you have courage enough to chase a blackbird about the fields , but when you see a dead hen lying , you have to get a stick before you go near it .
i must go and see for myself what kind of a monster it is ," added the master , and went quite boldly into the granary and looked round him .
when , however , he saw the strange grim creature with his own eyes , he was no less terrified than the servant had been .
with two bounds he sprang out , ran to his neighbours , and begged them imploringly to lend him assistance against an unknown and dangerous beast , or else the whole town might be in danger if it were to break loose out of the barn , where it was shut up .
a great noise and clamour arose in all the streets , the townsmen came armed with spears , hay - forks , scythes , and axes , as if they were going out against an enemy ; finally , the senators appeared with the burgomaster at their head .
when they had drawn up in the market - place , they marched to the barn , and surrounded it on all sides .
thereupon one of the most courageous of them stepped forth and entered with his spear lowered , but came running out immediately afterwards with a shriek and as pale as death , and could not utter a single word .
yet two others ventured in , but they fared no better .
at last one stepped forth ; a great strong man who was famous for his warlike deeds , and said , " you will not drive away the monster by merely looking at him ; we must be in earnest here , but i see that you have all tuned into women , and not one of you dares to encounter the animal ."
he ordered them to give him some armour , had a sword and spear brought , and armed himself .
all praised his courage , though many feared for his life .
the two barn - doors were opened , and they saw the owl , which in the meantime had perched herself on the middle of a great cross - beam .
he had a ladder brought , and when he raised it , and made ready to climb up , they all cried out to him that he was to bear himself bravely , and commended him to st . george , who slew the dragon .
when he had just got to the top , and the owl perceived that he had designs on her , and was also bewildered by the crowd and the shouting , and knew not how to escape , she rolled her eyes , ruffled her feathers , flapped her wings , snapped her beak , and cried , " tuwhit , tuwhoo ," in a harsh voice .
" strike home !
strike home !"
screamed the crowd outside to the valiant hero .
" any one who was standing where i am standing ," answered he , " would not cry , strike home !"
he certainly did plant his foot one rung higher on the ladder , but then he began to tremble , and half - fainting , went back again . and now there was no one left who dared to put himself in such danger .
" the monster ," said they , " has poisoned and mortally wounded the very strongest man among us , by snapping at him and just breathing on him !
are we , too , to risk our lives ?"
they took counsel as to what they ought to do to prevent the whole town being destroyed .
for a long time everything seemed to be of no use , but at length the burgomaster found an expedient .
" my opinion ," said he , " is that we ought , out of the common purse , to pay for this barn , and whatsoever corn , straw , or hay it contains , and thus indemnify the owner , and then burn down the whole building , and the terrible beast with it .
thus no one will have to endanger his life .
this is no time for thinking of expense , and niggardliness would be ill applied ."
all agreed with him .
so they set fire to the barn at all four corners , and with it the owl was miserably burnt .
let any one who will not believe it , go thither and inquire for himself .
