when god had created the world and was about to fix the length of each creature ' s life , the ass came and asked , " lord , how long shall i live ?"
- " thirty years ," replied god ; " does that content thee ?"
- " ah , lord ," answered the ass , " that is a long time .
think of my painful existence !
to carry heavy burdens from morning to night , to drag sacks of corn to the mill , that others may eat bread , to be cheered and refreshed with nothing but blows and kicks .
relieve me of a portion of this long time ."
then god had pity on him and relieved him of eighteen years .
the ass went away comforted , and the dog appeared .
" how long wouldst thou like to live ?"
said god to him .
" thirty years are too many for the ass , but thou wilt be satisfied with that ."
- " lord ," answered the dog , " is that thy will ?
consider how i shall have to run , my feet will never hold out so long , and when i have once lost my voice for barking , and my teeth for biting , what will be left for me to do but run from one corner to another and growl ?"
god saw that he was right , and released him from twelve years of life .
then came the monkey .
" thou wilt certainly live thirty years willingly ?"
said the lord to him .
" thou hast no need to work as the ass and the dog have to do , and wilt always enjoy thyself ."
- " ah !
lord ," he answered , " it may seem as if that were the case , but it is quite different .
when it rains porridge i have no spoon .
i am always to play merry pranks , and make faces which force people to laugh , and if they give me an apple , and i bite into it , why it is sour !
how often sadness hides itself behind mirth !
i shall never be able to hold out for thirty years ."
god was gracious and took off ten . at last man appeared , joyous , healthy and vigorous , and begged god to appoint his time for him .
" thirty years shalt thou live ," said the lord .
" is that enough for thee ?"
- " what a short time ," cried man , " when i have built my house and my fire burns on my own hearth ; when i have planted trees which blossom and bear fruit , and am just intending to enjoy my life , i am to die !
o lord , lengthen my time ."
- " i will add to it the ass ' s eighteen years ," said god .
" that is not enough ," replied the man .
" thou shalt also have the dog ' s twelve years ."
- " still too little !"
- " well , then ," said god , " i will give thee the monkey ' s ten years also , but more thou shalt not have ."
the man went away , but was not satisfied . so man lives seventy years .
the first thirty are his human years , which are soon gone ; then is he healthy , merry , works with pleasure , and is glad of his life .
then follow the ass ' s eighteen years , when one burden after another is laid on him , he has to carry the corn which feeds others , and blows and kicks are the reward of his faithful services .
then come the dog ' s twelve years , when he lies in the corner , and growls and has no longer any teeth to bite with , and when this time is over the monkey ' s ten years form the end .
then man is weak - headed and foolish , does silly things , and becomes the jest of the children .
