a cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse , and had said so much to her about the great love and friendship that he felt for her , that at last the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together .
" but we must make preparations for winter , or else we shall suffer from hunger ," said the cat , " and you , little mouse , cannot venture out everywhere , or in the end you will be caught in a trap ."
this good advice was followed , and they bought a pot of fat , but they did not know where to store it .
finally , after much consideration , the cat said , " i know of no place where it will be better stored up than in the church .
no one dares take anything away from there .
we will put it beneath the altar , and not touch it until we are need it ."
so the pot was stored safely away , but it was not long before the cat took a great longing for it , and said to the mouse , " i wanted to tell you , little mouse , that my cousin has brought a little son into the world , and she has asked me to be his godfather .
he is white with brown spots , and i am to hold him over the baptismal font .
let me go out today , and you look after the house by yourself ."
- " yes , yes ," answered the mouse .
" by all means go , and if you get anything good to eat , think of me .
i would like to drink a drop of sweet red christening wine myself ."
all this , however , was untrue .
the cat had no cousin , and had not been asked to be godfather .
he went straight to the church , crept up to the pot of fat , began to lick at it , and licked off the top of the fat .
then he went for a stroll on the roofs of the town , looked out for opportunities , and then stretched out in the sun , licking his whiskers whenever he thought of the pot of fat .
he did not return home until it was evening .
" well , here you are again ," said the mouse .
" you must have had a happy day ."
- " everything went well ," answered the cat .
" what name did they give the child ?"
asked the mouse .
" top - off ," said the cat quite coolly .
" top - off ?"
cried the mouse .
" that is a very odd and uncommon name .
is it a usual one in your family ?"
- " what does that matter ?"
said the cat .
" it is no worse than crumb - thief , as your godchildren are called .
" before long the cat was seized by another fit of longing .
he said to the mouse , " you must do me a favor , and once more manage the house alone for a day .
i have been asked again to be godfather , and since the child has a white ring around its neck , i cannot refuse ."
the good mouse consented .
however , the cat crept behind the town wall to the church , and devoured half the pot of fat .
" nothing tastes as good as that which one eats by oneself ," he said , and was quite satisfied with his day ' s work .
when he arrived home the mouse asked , " what name was this child christened with ?"
- " half - gone ," answered the cat .
" half - gone ?
what are you saying ?
i have never heard that name in all my life .
i ' ll wager it is not in the almanac .
" the cat ' s mouth soon again began to water for the delicious goods .
" all good things come in threes ," he said to the mouse .
" i have been asked to be godfather again .
the child is totally black , only it has white paws .
otherwise it has not a single white hair on its whole body .
this only happens once every few years .
you will let me go , won ' t you ?"
- " top - off .
half - gone ," answered the mouse .
" they are such odd names , that they make me stop and think ."
- " here you sit at home ," said the cat , " with your dark gray fur coat and long braid of hair capturing fantasies .
that is because you do not go out in the daytime ."
during the cat ' s absence the mouse cleaned the house , and put it in order , but the greedy cat devoured all the rest of the fat .
" one has peace only after everything is eaten up ," he said to himself .
well filled and fat , he did not return home until nighttime .
the mouse immediately asked what name had been given to the third child .
" you will not like it either ," said the cat .
" his name is all - gone ."
- " all - gone !," cried the mouse .
" that is the most worrisome name of all .
i have never seen it in print .
all - gone !
what can that mean ?"
then she shook her head , curled herself up , and lay down to sleep . from this time forth no one invited the cat to be godfather , but when winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found outside , the mouse thought of their stored food , and said , " come cat , we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves .
it will taste good now ."
- " yes ," answered the cat .
" you will enjoy it as much as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the window ."
they set out on their way , but when they arrived , the pot of fat , to be sure , was still in its place , but it was empty .
" alas ," said the mouse , " now i see what has happened .
now it comes to light .
you are a true friend .
you ate everything when you were serving as a godfather .
first top off , then half done , then ..." - " be quiet !"
cried the cat .
" one more word , and i will eat you too .
"" all gone ," was already on the poor mouse ' s lips .
she had scarcely spoken it before the cat sprang on her , seized her , and swallowed her down .
you see , that is the way of the world .
