there was once upon a time a very old woman , who lived with he flock of geese in a waste place among the mountains , and there had a little house .
the waste was surrounded by a large forest , and every morning the old woman took her crutch and hobbled into it .
there , however , the dame was quite active , more so than any one would have thought , considering her age , and collected grass for her geese , picked all the wild fruit she could reach , and carried everything home on her back .
any one would have thought that the heavy load would have weighed her to the ground , but she always brought it safely home .
if any one met her , she greeted him quite courteously .
" good day , dear countryman , it is a fine day .
ah !
you wonder that i should drag grass about , but every one must take his burthen on his back ."
nevertheless , people did not like to meet her if they could help it , and took by preference a round - about way , and when a father with his boys passed her , he whispered to them , " beware of the old woman .
she has claws beneath her gloves ; she is a witch .
" one morning , a handsome young man was going through the forest .
the sun shone bright , the birds sang , a cool breeze crept through the leaves , and he was full of joy and gladness .
he had as yet met no one , when he suddenly perceived the old witch kneeling on the ground cutting grass with a sickle .
she had already thrust a whole load into her cloth , and near it stood two baskets , which were filled with wild apples and pears .
" but , good little mother ," said he , " how canst thou carry all that away ?"
- " i must carry it , dear sir ," answered she , " rich folk ' s children have no need to do such things , but with the peasant folk the saying goes , don ' t look behind you , you will only see how crooked your back is !"
" will you help me ?"
she said , as he remained standing by her .
" you have still a straight back and young legs , it would be a trifle to you .
besides , my house is not so very far from here , it stands there on the heath behind the hill .
how soon you would bound up thither ."
the young man took compassion on the old woman .
" my father is certainly no peasant ," replied he , " but a rich count ; nevertheless , that you may see that it is not only peasants who can carry things , i will take your bundle ."
if you will try it ," said she , " i shall be very glad .
you will certainly have to walk for an hour , but what will that signify to you ; only you must carry the apples and pears as well ?"
it now seemed to the young man just a little serious , when he heard of an hour ' s walk , but the old woman would not let him off , packed the bundle on his back , and hung the two baskets on his arm .
" see , it is quite light ," said she .
" no , it is not light ," answered the count , and pulled a rueful face .
" verily , the bundle weighs as heavily as if it were full of cobble stones , and the apples and pears are as heavy as lead !
i can scarcely breathe ."
he had a mind to put everything down again , but the old woman would not allow it .
" just look ," said she mockingly , " the young gentleman will not carry what i , an old woman , have so often dragged along .
you are ready with fine words , but when it comes to be earnest , you want to take to your heels .
why are you standing loitering there ?"
she continued .
" step out .
no one will take the bundle off again ."
as long as he walked on level ground , it was still bearable , but when they came to the hill and had to climb , and the stones rolled down under his feet as if they were alive , it was beyond his strength .
the drops of perspiration stood on his forehead , and ran , hot and cold , down his back .
" dame ," said he , " i can go no farther .
i want to rest a little ."
- " not here ," answered the old woman , " when we have arrived at our journey ' s end , you can rest ; but now you must go forward .
who knows what good it may do you ?"
- " old woman , thou art becoming shameless !"
said the count , and tried to throw off the bundle , but he laboured in vain ; it stuck as fast to his back as if it grew there .
he turned and twisted , but he could not get rid of it .
the old woman laughed at this , and sprang about quite delighted on her crutch .
" don ' t get angry , dear sir ," said she , " you are growing as red in the face as a turkey - cock !
carry your bundle patiently .
i will give you a good present when we get home ."
what could he do .
he was obliged to submit to his fate , and crawl along patiently behind the old woman .
she seemed to grow more and more nimble , and his burden still heavier .
all at once she made a spring , jumped on to the bundle and seated herself on the top of it ; and however withered she might be , she was yet heavier than the stoutest country lass .
the youth ' s knees trembled , but when he did not go on , the old woman hit him about the legs with a switch and with stinging - nettles .
groaning continually , he climbed the mountain , and at length reached the old woman ' s house , when he was just about to drop .
when the geese perceived the old woman , they flapped their wings , stretched out their necks , ran to meet her , cackling all the while .
behind the flock walked , stick in hand , an old wench , strong and big , but ugly as night .
" good mother ," said she to the old woman , " has anything happened to you , you have stayed away so long ?"
- " by no means , my dear daughter ," answered she , i have met with nothing bad , but , on the contrary , with this kind gentleman , who has carried my burthen for me ; only think , he even took me on his back when i was tired .
the way , too , has not seemed long to us ; we have been merry , and have been cracking jokes with each other all the time ."
at last the old woman slid down , took the bundle off the young man ' s back , and the baskets from his arm , looked at him quite kindly , and said , " now seat yourself on the bench before the door , and rest .
you have fairly earned your wages , and they shall not be wanting ."
then she said to the goose - girl , " go into the house , my dear daughter , it is not becoming for thee to be alone with a young gentleman ; one must not pour oil on to the fire , he might fall in love with thee ."
the count knew not whether to laugh or to cry .
" such a sweetheart as that ," thought he , " could not touch my heart , even if she were thirty years younger ."
in the meantime the old woman stroked and fondled her geese as if they were children , and then went into the house with her daughter .
the youth lay down on the bench , under a wild apple - tree .
the air was warm and mild ; on all sides stretched a green meadow , which was set with cowslips , wild thyme , and a thousand other flowers ; through the midst of it rippled a clear brook on which the sun sparkled , and the white geese went walking backwards and forwards , or paddled in the water .
" it is quite delightful here ," said he , " but i am so tired that i cannot keep my eyes open ; i will sleep a little .
if only a gust of wind does not come and blow my legs off my body , for they are as rotten as tinder .
" when he had slept a little while , the old woman came and shook him till he awoke .
" sit up ," said she , " thou canst not stay here ; i have certainly treated thee hardly , still it has not cost thee thy life .
of money and land thou hast no need , here is something else for thee ."
thereupon she thrust a little book into his hand , which was cut out of a single emerald .
" take great care of it ," said she , " it will bring thee good fortune ."
the count sprang up , and as he felt that he was quite fresh , and had recovered his vigor , he thanked the old woman for her present , and set off without even once looking back at the beautiful daughter .
when he was already some way off , he still heard in the distance the noisy cry of the geese . for three days the count had to wander in the wilderness before he could find his way out .
he then reached a large town , and as no one knew him , he was led into the royal palace , where the king and queen were sitting on their throne .
the count fell on one knee , drew the emerald book out of his pocket , and laid it at the queen ' s feet .
she bade him rise and hand her the little book .
hardly , however , had she opened it , and looked therein , than she fell as if dead to the ground .
the count was seized by the king ' s servants , and was being led to prison , when the queen opened her eyes , and ordered them to release him , and every one was to go out , as she wished to speak with him in private . when the queen was alone , she began to weep bitterly , and said , " of what use to me are the splendours and honours with which i am surrounded ; every morning i awake in pain and sorrow .
i had three daughters , the youngest of whom was so beautiful that the whole world looked on her as a wonder .
she was as white as snow , as rosy as apple - blossom , and her hair as radiant as sun - beams .
when she cried , not tears fell from her eyes , but pearls and jewels only .
when she was fifteen years old , the king summoned all three sisters to come before his throne .
you should have seen how all the people gazed when the youngest entered , it was just as if the sun were rising !
then the king spoke , ' my daughters , i know not when my last day may arrive ; i will to - day decide what each shall receive at my death .
you all love me , but the one of you who loves me best , shall fare the best .'
each of them said she loved him best .
' can you not express to me ,' said the king , ' how much you do love me , and thus i shall see what you mean ?'
the eldest spoke , ' i love my father as dearly as the sweetest sugar .'
the second , ' i love my father as dearly as my prettiest dress .'
but the youngest was silent .
then the father said , ' and thou , my dearest child , how much dost thou love me ?'
- ' i do not know , and can compare my love with nothing .'
but her father insisted that she should name something .
so she said at last , ' the best food does not please me without salt , therefore i love my father like salt .'
when the king heard that , he fell into a passion , and said , ' if thou lovest me like salt , thy love shall also be repaid thee with salt .'
then he divided the kingdom between the two elder , but caused a sack of salt to be bound on the back of the youngest , and two servants had to lead her forth into the wild forest .
we all begged and prayed for her ," said the queen , " but the king ' s anger was not to be appeased .
how she cried when she had to leave us !
the whole road was strewn with the pearls which flowed from her eyes .
the king soon afterwards repented of his great severity , and had the whole forest searched for the poor child , but no one could find her .
when i think that the wild beasts have devoured her , i know not how to contain myself for sorrow ; many a time i console myself with the hope that she is still alive , and may have hidden herself in a cave , or has found shelter with compassionate people .
but picture to yourself , when i opened your little emerald book , a pearl lay therein , of exactly the same kind as those which used to fall from my daughter ' s eyes ; and then you can also imagine how the sight of it stirred my heart .
you must tell me how you came by that pearl ."
the count told her that he had received it from the old woman in the forest , who had appeared very strange to him , and must be a witch , but he had neither seen nor hear anything of the queen ' s child .
the king and the queen resolved to seek out the old woman .
they thought that there where the pearl had been , they would obtain news of their daughter . the old woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinning - wheel , spinning .
it was already dusk , and a log which was burning on the hearth gave a scanty light .
all at once there was a noise outside , the geese were coming home from the pasture , and uttering their hoarse cries .
soon afterwards the daughter also entered .
but the old woman scarcely thanked her , and only shook her head a little .
the daughter sat down beside her , took her spinning - wheel , and twisted the threads as nimbly as a young girl .
thus they both sat for two hours , and exchanged never a word .
at last something rustled at the window , and two fiery eyes peered in .
it was an old night - owl , which cried , " uhu !"
three times .
the old woman looked up just a little , then she said , " now , my little daughter , it is time for thee to go out and do thy work .
" she rose and went out , and where did she go ?
over the meadows ever onward into the valley .
at last she came to a well , with three old oak - trees standing beside it ; meanwhile the moon had risen large and round over the mountain , and it was so light that one could have found a needle .
she removed a skin which covered her face , then bent down to the well , and began to wash herself .
when she had finished , she dipped the skin also in the water , and then laid it on the meadow , so that it should bleach in the moonlight , and dry again .
but how the maiden was changed !
such a change as that was never seen before !
when the gray mask fell off , her golden hair broke forth like sunbeams , and spread about like a mantle over her whole form .
her eyes shone out as brightly as the stars in heaven , and her cheeks bloomed a soft red like apple - blossom . but the fair maiden was sad .
she sat down and wept bitterly .
one tear after another forced itself out of her eyes , and rolled through her long hair to the ground .
there she sat , and would have remained sitting a long time , if there had not been a rustling and cracking in the boughs of the neighbouring tree .
she sprang up like a roe which has been overtaken by the shot of the hunter .
just then the moon was obscured by a dark cloud , and in an instant the maiden had put on the old skin and vanished , like a light blown out by the wind . she ran back home , trembling like an aspen - leaf .
the old woman was standing on the threshold , and the girl was about to relate what had befallen her , but the old woman laughed kindly , and said , " i already know all ."
she led her into the room and lighted a new log .
she did not , however , sit down to her spinning again , but fetched a broom and began to sweep and scour , " all must be clean and sweet ," she said to the girl .
" but , mother ," said the maiden , " why do you begin work at so late an hour ?
what do you expect ?"
- " dost thou know then what time it is ?"
asked the old woman .
" not yet midnight ," answered the maiden , " but already past eleven o ' clock ."
- " dost thou not remember ," continued the old woman , " that it is three years to - day since thou camest to me ?
thy time is up , we can no longer remain together ."
the girl was terrified , and said , " alas !
dear mother , will you cast me off ?
where shall i go ?
i have no friends , and no home to which i can go .
i have always done as you bade me , and you have always been satisfied with me ; do not send me away ."
the old woman would not tell the maiden what lay before her .
" my stay here is over ," she said to her , " but when i depart , house and parlour must be clean : therefore do not hinder me in my work .
have no care for thyself , thou shalt find a roof to shelter thee , and the wages which i will give thee shall also content thee ."
- " but tell me what is about to happen ," the maiden continued to entreat .
" i tell thee again , do not hinder me in my work .
do not say a word more , go to thy chamber , take the skin off thy face , and put on the silken gown which thou hadst on when thou camest to me , and then wait in thy chamber until i call thee .
" but i must once more tell of the king and queen , who had journeyed forth with the count in order to seek out the old woman in the wilderness .
the count had strayed away from them in the wood by night , and had to walk onwards alone .
next day it seemed to him that he was on the right track .
he still went forward , until darkness came on , then he climbed a tree , intending to pass the night there , for he feared that he might lose his way .
when the moon illumined the surrounding country he perceived a figure coming down the mountain .
she had no stick in her hand , but yet he could see that it was the goose - girl , whom he had seen before in the house of the old woman .
" oho ," cried he , " there she comes , and if i once get hold of one of the witches , the other shall not escape me !"
but how astonished he was , when she went to the well , took off the skin and washed herself , when her golden hair fell down all about her , and she was more beautiful than any one whom he had ever seen in the whole world .
he hardly dared to breathe , but stretched his head as far forward through the leaves as he dared , and stared at her .
either he bent over too far , or whatever the cause might be , the bough suddenly cracked , and that very moment the maiden slipped into the skin , sprang away like a roe , and as the moon was suddenly covered , disappeared from his eyes . hardly had she disappeared , before the count descended from the tree , and hastened after her with nimble steps .
he had not been gone long before he saw , in the twilight , two figures coming over the meadow .
it was the king and queen , who had perceived from a distance the light shining in the old woman ' s little house , and were going to it .
the count told them what wonderful things he had seen by the well , and they did not doubt that it had been their lost daughter .
they walked onwards full of joy , and soon came to the little house .
the geese were sitting all round it , and had thrust their heads under their wings and were sleeping , and not one of them moved .
the king and queen looked in at the window , the old woman was sitting there quite quietly spinning , nodding her head and never looking round .
the room was perfectly clean , as if the little mist men , who carry no dust on their feet , lived there .
their daughter , however , they did not see .
they gazed at all this for a long time , at last they took heart , and knocked softly at the window .
the old woman appeared to have been expecting them ; she rose , and called out quite kindly , " come in , i know you already ."
when they had entered the room , the old woman said , " you might have spared yourself the long walk , if you had not three years ago unjustly driven away your child , who is so good and lovable .
no harm has come to her ; for three years she has had to tend the geese ; with them she has learnt no evil , but has preserved her purity of heart .
you , however , have been sufficiently punished by the misery in which you have lived ."
then she went to the chamber and called , " come out , my little daughter ."
thereupon the door opened , and the princess stepped out in her silken garments , with her golden hair and her shining eyes , and it was as if an angel from heaven had entered . she went up to her father and mother , fell on their necks and kissed them ; there was no help for it , they all had to weep for joy .
the young count stood near them , and when she perceived him she became as red in the face as a moss - rose , she herself did not know why .
the king said , " my dear child , i have given away my kingdom , what shall i give thee ?"
- " she needs nothing ," said the old woman .
" i give her the tears that she has wept on your account ; they are precious pearls , finer than those that are found in the sea , and worth more than your whole kingdom , and i give her my little house as payment for her services ."
when the old woman had said that , she disappeared from their sight .
the walls rattled a little , and when the king and queen looked round , the little house had changed into a splendid palace , a royal table had been spread , and the servants were running hither and thither . the story goes still further , but my grandmother , who related it to me , had partly lost her memory , and had forgotten the rest .
i shall always believe that the beautiful princess married the count , and that they remained together in the palace , and lived there in all happiness so long as god willed it .
whether the snow - white geese , which were kept near the little hut , were verily young maidens ( no one need take offence ), whom the old woman had taken under her protection , and whether they now received their human form again , and stayed as handmaids to the young queen , i do not exactly know , but i suspect it .
this much is certain , that the old woman was no witch , as people thought , but a wise woman , who meant well .
very likely it was she who , at the princess ' s birth , gave her the gift of weeping pearls instead of tears .
that does not happen now - a - days , or else the poor would soon become rich .
