there was once upon a time a miller who lived with his wife in great contentment .
they had money and land , and their prosperity increased year by year more and more .
but ill - luck comes like a thief in the night , as their wealth had increased so did it again decrease , year by year , and at last the miller could hardly call the mill in which he lived , his own .
he was in great distress , and when he lay down after his day ' s work , found no rest , but tossed about in his bed , full of care .
one morning he rose before daybreak and went out into the open air , thinking that perhaps there his heart might become lighter .
as he was stepping over the mill - dam the first sunbeam was just breaking forth , and he heard a rippling sound in the pond .
he turned round and perceived a beautiful woman , rising slowly out of the water .
her long hair , which she was holding off her shoulders with her soft hands , fell down on both sides , and covered her white body .
he soon saw that she was the nix of the mill - pond , and in his fright did not know whether he should run away or stay where he was .
but the nix made her sweet voice heard , called him by his name , and asked him why he was so sad ?
the miller was at first struck dumb , but when he heard her speak so kindly , he took heart , and told her how he had formerly lived in wealth and happiness , but that now he was so poor that he did not know what to do .
" be easy ," answered the nix , " i will make thee richer and happier than thou hast ever been before , only thou must promise to give me the young thing which has just been born in thy house ."
- " what else can that be ," thought the miller , " but a young puppy or kitten ?"
and he promised her what she desired .
the nix descended into the water again , and he hurried back to his mill , consoled and in good spirits .
he had not yet reached it , when the maid - servant came out of the house , and cried to him to rejoice , for his wife had given birth to a little boy .
the miller stood as if struck by lightning ; he saw very well that the cunning nix had been aware of it , and had cheated him .
hanging his head , he went up to his wife ' s bedside and when she said , " why dost thou not rejoice over the fine boy ?"
he told her what had befallen him , and what kind of a promise he had given to the nix .
" of what use to me are riches and prosperity ?"
he added , " if i am to lose my child ; but what can i do ?"
even the relations , who had come thither to wish them joy , did not know what to say .
in the meantime prosperity again returned to the miller ' s house .
all that he undertook succeeded , it was as if presses and coffers filled themselves of their own accord , and as if money multiplied nightly in the cupboards .
it was not long before his wealth was greater than it had ever been before .
but he could not rejoice over it untroubled , for the bargain which he had made with the nix tormented his soul .
whenever he passed the mill - pond , he feared she might ascend and remind him of his debt .
he never let the boy himself go near the water .
" beware ," he said to him , " if thou dost but touch the water , a hand will rise , seize thee , and draw thee down ."
but as year after year went by and the nix did not show herself again , the miller began to feel at ease .
the boy grew up to be a youth and was apprenticed to a huntsman .
when he had learnt everything , and had become an excellent huntsman , the lord of the village took him into his service .
in the village lived a beautiful and true - hearted maiden , who pleased the huntsman , and when his master perceived that , he gave him a little house , the two were married , lived peacefully and happily , and loved each other with all their hearts .
one day the huntsman was chasing a roe ; and when the animal turned aside from the forest into the open country , he pursued it and at last shot it .
he did not notice that he was now in the neighbourhood of the dangerous mill - pond , and went , after he had disembowelled the stag , to the water , in order to wash his blood - stained hands .
scarcely , however , had he dipped them in than the nix ascended , smilingly wound her dripping arms around him , and drew him quickly down under the waves , which closed over him .
when it was evening , and the huntsman did not return home , his wife became alarmed .
she went out to seek him , and as he had often told her that he had to be on his guard against the snares of the nix , and dared not venture into the neighbourhood of the mill - pond , she already suspected what had happened .
she hastened to the water , and when she found his hunting - pouch lying on the shore , she could no longer have any doubt of the misfortune .
lamenting her sorrow , and wringing her hands , she called on her beloved by name , but in vain .
she hurried across to the other side of the pond , and called him anew ; she reviled the nix with harsh words , but no answer followed .
the surface of the water remained calm , only the crescent moon stared steadily back at her .
the poor woman did not leave the pond .
with hasty steps , she paced round and round it , without resting a moment , sometimes in silence , sometimes uttering a loud cry , sometimes softly sobbing .
at last her strength came to an end , she sank down to the ground and fell into a heavy sleep .
presently a dream took possession of her .
she was anxiously climbing upwards between great masses of rock ; thorns and briars caught her feet , the rain beat in her face , and the wind tossed her long hair about .
when she had reached the summit , quite a different sight presented itself to her ; the sky was blue , the air soft , the ground sloped gently downwards , and on a green meadow , gay with flowers of every colour , stood a pretty cottage .
she went up to it and opened the door ; there sat an old woman with white hair , who beckoned to her kindly .
at that very moment , the poor woman awoke , day had already dawned , and she at once resolved to act in accordance with her dream .
she laboriously climbed the mountain ; everything was exactly as she had seen it in the night .
the old woman received her kindly , and pointed out a chair on which she might sit .
" thou must have met with a misfortune ," she said , " since thou hast sought out my lonely cottage ."
with tears , the woman related what had befallen her .
" be comforted ," said the old woman , " i will help thee .
here is a golden comb for thee .
tarry till the full moon has risen , then go to the mill - pond , seat thyself on the shore , and comb thy long black hair with this comb .
when thou hast done , lay it down on the bank , and thou wilt see what will happen ."
the woman returned home , but the time till the full moon came , passed slowly .
at last the shining disc appeared in the heavens , then she went out to the mill - pond , sat down and combed her long black hair with the golden comb , and when she had finished , she laid it down at the water ' s edge .
it was not long before there was a movement in the depths , a wave rose , rolled to the shore , and bore the comb away with it .
in not more than the time necessary for the comb to sink to the bottom , the surface of the water parted , and the head of the huntsman arose .
he did not speak , but looked at his wife with sorrowful glances .
at the same instant , a second wave came rushing up , and covered the man ' s head .
all had vanished , the mill - pond lay peaceful as before , and nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it .
full of sorrow , the woman went back , but again the dream showed her the cottage of the old woman .
next morning she again set out and complained of her woes to the wise woman .
the old woman gave her a golden flute , and said , " tarry till the full moon comes again , then take this flute ; play a beautiful air on it , and when thou hast finished , lay it on the sand ; then thou wilt see what will happen ."
the wife did as the old woman told her .
no sooner was the flute lying on the sand than there was a stirring in the depths , and a wave rushed up and bore the flute away with it .
immediately afterwards the water parted , and not only the head of the man , but half of his body also arose .
he stretched out his arms longingly towards her , but a second wave came up , covered him , and drew him down again .
" alas , what does it profit me ?"
said the unhappy woman , " that i should see my beloved , only to lose him again !"
despair filled her heart anew , but the dream led her a third time to the house of the old woman .
she set out , and the wise woman gave her a golden spinning - wheel , consoled her and said , " all is not yet fulfilled , tarry until the time of the full moon , then take the spinning - wheel , seat thyself on the shore , and spin the spool full , and when thou hast done that , place the spinning - wheel near the water , and thou wilt see what will happen ."
the woman obeyed all she said exactly ; as soon as the full moon showed itself , she carried the golden spinning - wheel to the shore , and span industriously until the flax came to an end , and the spool was quite filled with the threads .
no sooner was the wheel standing on the shore than there was a more violent movement than before in the depths of the pond , and a mighty wave rushed up , and bore the wheel away with it .
immediately the head and the whole body of the man rose into the air , in a water - spout .
he quickly sprang to the shore , caught his wife by the hand and fled .
but they had scarcely gone a very little distance , when the whole pond rose with a frightful roar , and streamed out over the open country .
the fugitives already saw death before their eyes , when the woman in her terror implored the help of the old woman , and in an instant they were transformed , she into a toad , he into a frog .
the flood which had overtaken them could not destroy them , but it tore them apart and carried them far away .
when the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land again , they regained their human form , but neither knew where the other was ; they found themselves among strange people , who did not know their native land .
high mountains and deep valleys lay between them .
in order to keep themselves alive , they were both obliged to tend sheep .
for many long years they drove their flocks through field and forest and were full of sorrow and longing .
when spring had once more broken forth on the earth , they both went out one day with their flocks , and as chance would have it , they drew near each other .
they met in a valley , but did not recognize each other ; yet they rejoiced that they were no longer so lonely .
henceforth they each day drove their flocks to the same place ; they did not speak much , but they felt comforted .
one evening when the full moon was shining in the sky , and the sheep were already at rest , the shepherd pulled the flute out of his pocket , and played on it a beautiful but sorrowful air .
when he had finished he saw that the shepherdess was weeping bitterly .
" why art thou weeping ?"
he asked .
" alas ," answered she , " thus shone the full moon when i played this air on the flute for the last time , and the head of my beloved rose out of the water ."
he looked at her , and it seemed as if a veil fell from his eyes , and he recognized his dear wife , and when she looked at him , and the moon shone in his face she knew him also .
they embraced and kissed each other , and no one need ask if they were happy .
