an old woman lived in a village .
she had gathered a serving of beans and wanted to cook them , so she prepared a fire in her fireplace .
to make it burn faster she lit it with a handful of straw .
while she was pouring the beans into the pot , one of them fell unnoticed to the floor , coming to rest next to a piece of straw .
soon afterward a glowing coal jumped out of the fireplace and landed next to them .
the straw said , " dear friends , where do you come from ?"
the coal answered , " i jumped from the fireplace , to my good fortune .
if i had not forced my way out , i surely would have died .
i would have burned to ash ."
the bean said , " i too saved my skin .
if the old woman had gotten me into the pot i would have been cooked to mush without mercy , just like my comrades ."
- " would my fate have been any better ?"
said the straw .
" the old woman sent all my brothers up in fire and smoke .
she grabbed sixty at once and killed them .
fortunately i slipped through her fingers ."
- " what should we do now ?"
asked the coal .
" because we have so fortunately escaped death ," answered the bean , " i think that we should join together as comrades .
to prevent some new misfortune from befalling us here , let us together make our way to another land .
" this proposal pleased the other two , and they set forth all together .
they soon came to a small brook , and because there was neither a bridge nor a walkway there , they did not know how they would get across it .
then the straw had a good idea , and said , " i will lay myself across it , and you can walk across me like on a bridge ."
so the straw stretched himself from one bank to the other .
the coal , who was a hot - headed fellow , stepped brashly onto the newly constructed bridge , but when he got to the middle and heard the water rushing beneath him , he took fright , stopped , and did not dare to go any further .
then the straw caught fire , broke into two pieces , and fell into the brook .
the coal slid after him , hissed as he fell into the water , and gave up the ghost .
the bean who had cautiously stayed behind on the bank had to laugh at the event .
he could not stop , and he laughed so fiercely that he burst .
now he too would have died , but fortunately a wandering tailor was there , resting near the brook .
having a compassionate heart , he got out a needle and thread and sewed the bean back together .
the bean thanked him most kindly .
however , because he had used black thread , since that time all beans have had a black seam .
