there was once a poor shepherd - boy whose father and mother were dead , and he was placed by the authorities in the house of a rich man , who was to feed him and bring him up .
the man and his wife , had however , bad hearts , and were greedy and anxious about their riches , and vexed whenever any one put a morsel of their bread in his mouth .
the poor young fellow might do what he liked , he got little to eat , but only so many blows the more .
one day he had to watch a hen and her chickens , but she ran through a quick - set hedge with them , and a hawk darted down instantly , and carried her off through the air .
the boy called , " thief !
thief !
rascal !"
with all the strength of his body .
but what good did that do ?
the hawk did not bring its prey back again .
the man heard the noise , and ran to the spot , and as soon as he saw that his hen was gone , he fell in a rage , and gave the boy such a beating that he could not stir for two days .
then he had to take care of the chickens without the hen , but now his difficulty was greater , for one ran here and the other there .
he thought he was doing a very wise thing when he tied them all together with a string , because then the hawk would not be able to steal any of them away from him .
but he was very much mistaken .
after two days , worn out with running about and hunger , he fell asleep ; the bird of prey came , and seized one of the chickens , and as the others were tied fast to it , it carried them all off together , perched itself on a tree , and devoured them .
the farmer was just coming home , and when he saw the misfortune , he got angry and beat the boy so unmercifully that he was forced to lie in bed for several days . when he was on his legs again , the farmer said to him , " thou art too stupid for me , i cannot make a herdsman of thee , thou must go as errand - boy ."
then he sent him to the judge , to whom he was to carry a basketful of grapes , and he gave him a letter as well .
on the way hunger and thirst tormented the unhappy boy so violently that he ate two of the bunches of grapes .
he took the basket to the judge , but when the judge had read the letter , and counted the bunches he said , " two clusters are wanting ."
the boy confessed quite honestly that , driven by hunger and thirst , he had devoured the two which were wanting .
the judge wrote a letter to the farmer , and asked for the same number of grapes again .
these also the boy had to take to him with a letter .
as he again was so extremely hungry and thirsty , he could not help it , and again ate two bunches .
but first he took the letter out of the basket , put it under a stone and seated himself thereon in order that the letter might not see and betray him .
the judge , however , again made him give an explanation about the missing bunches .
" ah ," said the boy , " how have you learnt that ?"
the letter could not know about it , for i put it under a stone before i did it ."
the judge could not help laughing at the boy ' s simplicity , and sent the man a letter wherein he cautioned him to keep the poor boy better , and not let him want for meat and drink , and also that he was to teach him what was right and what was wrong .
" i will soon show thee the difference ," said the hard man , " if thou wilt eat , thou must work , and if thou dost anything wrong , thou shalt be quite sufficiently taught by blows ."
the next day he set him a hard task .
he was to chop two bundles of straw for food for the horses , and then the man threatened : " in five hours ," said he , " i shall be back again , and if the straw is not cut to chaff by that time , i will beat thee until thou canst not move a limb ."
the farmer went with his wife , the man - servant and the girl , to the yearly fair , and left nothing behind for the boy but a small bit of bread .
the boy seated himself on the bench , and began to work with all his might .
as he got warm over it he put his little coat off and threw it on the straw .
in his terror lest he should not get done in time he kept constantly cutting , and in his haste , without noticing it , he chopped his little coat as well as the straw .
he became aware of the misfortune too late ; there was no repairing it .
" ah ," cried he , " now all is over with me !
the wicked man did not threaten me for nothing ; if he comes back and sees what i have done , he will kill me .
rather than that i will take my own life ."
the boy had once heard the farmer ' s wife say , " i have a pot with poison in it under my bed ."
she , however , had only said that to keep away greedy people , for there was honey in it .
the boy crept under the bed , brought out the pot , and ate all that was in it .
" i do not know ," said he , " folks say death is bitter , but it tastes very sweet to me .
it is no wonder that the farmer ' s wife has so often longed for death ."
he seated himself in a little chair , and was prepared to die .
but instead of becoming weaker he felt himself strengthened by the nourishing food .
" it cannot have been poison ," thought he , " but the farmer once said there was a small bottle of poison for flies in the box in which he keeps his clothes ; that , no doubt , will be the true poison , and bring death to me ."
it was , however , no poison for flies , but hungarian wine .
the boy got out the bottle , and emptied it .
" this death tastes sweet too ," said he , but shortly after when the wine began to mount into his brain and stupefy him , he thought his end was drawing near .
" i feel that i must die ," said he , " i will go away to the churchyard , and seek a grave ."
he staggered out , reached the churchyard , and laid himself in a newly dug grave .
he lost his senses more and more .
in the neighbourhood was an inn where a wedding was being kept ; when he heard the music , he fancied he was already in paradise , until at length he lost all consciousness .
the poor boy never awoke again ; the heat of the strong wine and the cold night - dew deprived him of life , and he remained in the grave in which he had laid himself .
when the farmer heard the news of the boy ' s death he was terrified , and afraid of being brought to justice indeed , his distress took such a powerful hold of him that he fell fainting to the ground .
his wife , who was standing on the hearth with a pan of hot fat , ran to him to help him .
but the flames darted against the pan , the whole house caught fire , in a few hours it lay in ashes , and the rest of the years they had to live they passed in poverty and misery , tormented by the pangs of conscience .
