there was once on a time a girl who was young and beautiful , but she had lost her mother when she was quite a child , and her step - mother did all she could to make the girl ' s life wretched .
whenever this woman gave her anything to do , she worked at it indefatigably , and did everything that lay in her power .
still she could not touch the heart of the wicked woman by that ; she was never satisfied ; it was never enough .
the harder the girl worked , the more work was put upon her , and all that the woman thought of was how to weigh her down with still heavier burdens , and make her life still more miserable .
one day she said to her , " here are twelve pounds of feathers which thou must pick , and if they are not done this evening , thou mayst expect a good beating .
dost thou imagine thou art to idle away the whole day ?"
the poor girl sat down to the work , but tears ran down her cheeks as she did so , for she saw plainly enough that it was quite impossible to finish the work in one day .
whenever she had a little heap of feathers lying before her , and she sighed or smote her hands together in her anguish , they flew away , and she had to pick them out again , and begin her work anew .
then she put her elbows on the table , laid her face in her two hands , and cried , " is there no one , then , on god ' s earth to have pity on me ?"
then she heard a low voice which said , " be comforted , my child , i have come to help thee ."
the maiden looked up , and an old woman was by her side .
she took the girl kindly by the hand , and said , " only tell me what is troubling thee ."
as she spoke so kindly , the girl told her of her miserable life , and how one burden after another was laid upon her , and she never could get to the end of the work which was given to her .
" if i have not done these feathers by this evening , my step - mother will beat me ; she has threatened she will , and i know she keeps her word ."
her tears began to flow again , but the good old woman said , " do not be afraid , my child ; rest a while , and in the meantime i will look to thy work ."
the girl lay down on her bed , and soon fell asleep .
the old woman seated herself at the table with the feathers , and how they did fly off the quills , which she scarcely touched with her withered hands !
the twelve pounds were soon finished , and when the girl awoke , great snow - white heaps were lying , piled up , and everything in the room was neatly cleared away , but the old woman had vanished .
the maiden thanked god , and sat still till evening came , when the step - mother came in and marvelled to see the work completed .
" just look , you awkward creature ," said she , " what can be done when people are industrious ; and why couldst thou not set about something else ?
there thou sittest with thy hands crossed ."
when she went out she said , " the creature is worth more than her salt .
i must give her some work that is still harder ."
next morning she called the girl , and said , " there is a spoon for thee ; with that thou must empty out for me the great pond which is beside the garden , and if it is not done by night , thou knowest what will happen ."
the girl took the spoon , and saw that it was full of holes ; but even if it had not been , she never could have emptied the pond with it .
she set to work at once , knelt down by the water , into which her tears were falling , and began to empty it .
but the good old woman appeared again , and when she learnt the cause of her grief , she said , " be of good cheer , my child .
go into the thicket and lie down and sleep ; i will soon do thy work ."
as soon as the old woman was alone , she barely touched the pond , and a vapour rose up on high from the water , and mingled itself with the clouds .
gradually the pond was emptied , and when the maiden awoke before sunset and came thither , she saw nothing but the fishes which were struggling in the mud .
she went to her step - mother , and showed her that the work was done .
" it ought to have been done long before this ," said she , and grew white with anger , but she meditated something new .
on the third morning she said to the girl , " thou must build me a castle on the plain there , and it must be ready by the evening ."
the maiden was dismayed , and said , " how can i complete such a great work ?"
- " i will endure no opposition ," screamed the step - mother .
if thou canst empty a pond with a spoon that is full of holes , thou canst build a castle too .
i will take possession of it this very day , and if anything is wanting , even if it be the most trifling thing in the kitchen or cellar , thou knowest what lies before thee !"
she drove the girl out , and when she entered the valley , the rocks were there , piled up one above the other , and all her strength would not have enabled her even to move the very smallest of them .
she sat down and wept , and still she hoped the old woman would help her .
the old woman was not long in coming ; she comforted her and said , " lie down there in the shade and sleep , and i will soon build the castle for thee .
if it would be a pleasure to thee , thou canst live in it thyself ."
when the maiden had gone away , the old woman touched the gray rocks .
they began to rise , and immediately moved together as if giants had built the walls ; and on these the building arose , and it seemed as if countless hands were working invisibly , and placing one stone upon another .
there was a dull heavy noise from the ground ; pillars arose of their own accord on high , and placed themselves in order near each other .
the tiles laid themselves in order on the roof , and when noon - day came , the great weather - cock was already turning itself on the summit of the tower , like a golden figure of the virgin with fluttering garments .
the inside of the castle was being finished while evening was drawing near .
how the old woman managed it , i know not ; but the walls of the rooms were hung with silk and velvet , embroidered chairs were there , and richly ornamented arm - chairs by marble tables ; crystal chandeliers hung down from the ceilings , and mirrored themselves in the smooth pavement ; green parrots were there in gilt cages , and so were strange birds which sang most beautifully , and there was on all sides as much magnificence as if a king were going to live there .
the sun was just setting when the girl awoke , and the brightness of a thousand lights flashed in her face .
she hurried to the castle , and entered by the open door .
the steps were spread with red cloth , and the golden balustrade beset with flowering trees .
when she saw the splendour of the apartment , she stood as if turned to stone .
who knows how long she might have stood there if she had not remembered the step - mother ?
" alas !"
she said to herself , " if she could but be satisfied at last , and would give up making my life a misery to me ."
the girl went and told her that the castle was ready .
" i will move into it at once ," said she , and rose from her seat .
when they entered the castle , she was forced to hold her hand before her eyes , the brilliancy of everything was so dazzling .
" thou seest ," said she to the girl , " how easy it has been for thee to do this ; i ought to have given thee something harder ."
she went through all the rooms , and examined every corner to see if anything was wanting or defective ; but she could discover nothing .
" now we will go down below ," said she , looking at the girl with malicious eyes .
" the kitchen and the cellar still have to be examined , and if thou hast forgotten anything thou shalt not escape thy punishment ."
but the fire was burning on the hearth , and the meat was cooking in the pans , the tongs and shovel were leaning against the wall , and the shining brazen utensils all arranged in sight .
nothing was wanting , not even a coal - box and water - pail .
" which is the way to the cellar ?"
she cried .
" if that is not abundantly filled , it shall go ill with thee ."
she herself raised up the trap - door and descended ; but she had hardly made two steps before the heavy trap - door which was only laid back , fell down .
the girl heard a scream , lifted up the door very quickly to go to her aid , but she had fallen down , and the girl found her lying lifeless at the bottom .
and now the magnificent castle belonged to the girl alone .
she at first did not know how to reconcile herself to her good fortune .
beautiful dresses were hanging in the wardrobes , the chests were filled with gold or silver , or with pearls and jewels , and she never felt a desire that she was not able to gratify .
and soon the fame of the beauty and riches of the maiden went over all the world .
wooers presented themselves daily , but none pleased her .
at length the son of the king came and he knew how to touch her heart , and she betrothed herself to him .
in the garden of the castle was a lime - tree , under which they were one day sitting together , when he said to her , " i will go home and obtain my father ' s consent to our marriage .
i entreat thee to wait for me here under this lime - tree , i shall be back with thee in a few hours ."
the maiden kissed him on his left cheek , and said , " keep true to me , and never let any one else kiss thee on this cheek .
i will wait here under the lime - tree until thou returnest .
the maid stayed beneath the lime - tree until sunset , but he did not return .
she sat three days from morning till evening , waiting for him , but in vain .
as he still was not there by the fourth day , she said , " some accident has assuredly befallen him .
i will go out and seek him , and will not come back until i have found him ."
she packed up three of her most beautiful dresses , one embroidered with bright stars , the second with silver moons , the third with golden suns , tied up a handful of jewels in her handkerchief , and set out .
she inquired everywhere for her betrothed , but no one had seen him ; no one knew anything about him .
far and wide did she wander through the world , but she found him not .
at last she hired herself to a farmer as a cow - herd , and buried her dresses and jewels beneath a stone .
and now she lived as a herdswoman , guarded her herd , and was very sad and full of longing for her beloved one ; she had a little calf which she taught to know her , and fed it out of her own hand , and when she said , " little calf , little calf , kneel by my side , and do not forget thy shepherd - maid , as the prince forgot his betrothed bride , who waited for him ' neath the lime - tree ' s shade .
" the little calf knelt down , and she stroked it .
and when she had lived for a couple of years alone and full of grief , a report was spread over all the land that the king ' s daughter was about to celebrate her marriage .
the road to the town passed through the village where the maiden was living , and it came to pass that once when the maiden was driving out her herd , her bridegroom travelled by .
he was sitting proudly on his horse , and never looked round , but when she saw him she recognized her beloved , and it was just as if a sharp knife had pierced her heart .
" alas !"
said she , " i believed him true to me , but he has forgotten me .
" next day he again came along the road .
when he was near her she said to the little calf , " little calf , little calf , kneel by my side , and do not forget thy shepherd - maid , as the prince forgot his betrothed bride , who waited for him ' neath the lime - tree ' s shade .
" when he was aware of the voice , he looked down and reined in his horse .
he looked into the herd ' s face , and then put his hands before his eyes as if he were trying to remember something , but he soon rode onwards and was out of sight .
" alas !"
said she , " he no longer knows me ," and her grief was ever greater .
soon after this a great festival three days long was to be held at the king ' s court , and the whole country was invited to it .
" now will i try my last chance ," thought the maiden , and when evening came she went to the stone under which she had buried her treasures .
she took out the dress with the golden suns , put it on , and adorned herself with the jewels .
she let down her hair , which she had concealed under a handkerchief , and it fell down in long curls about her , and thus she went into the town , and in the darkness was observed by no one .
when she entered the brightly - lighted hall , every one started back in amazement , but no one knew who she was .
the king ' s son went to meet her , but he did not recognize her .
he led her out to dance , and was so enchanted with her beauty , that he thought no more of the other bride .
when the feast was over , she vanished in the crowd , and hastened before daybreak to the village , where she once more put on her herd ' s dress .
next evening she took out the dress with the silver moons , and put a half - moon made of precious stones in her hair .
when she appeared at the festival , all eyes were turned upon her , but the king ' s son hastened to meet her , and filled with love for her , danced with her alone , and no longer so much as glanced at anyone else .
before she went away she was forced to promise him to come again to the festival on the last evening . when she appeared for the third time , she wore the star - dress which sparkled at every step she took , and her hair - ribbon and girdle were starred with jewels .
the prince had already been waiting for her for a long time , and forced his way up to her .
" do but tell who thou art ," said he , " i feel just as if i had already known thee a long time ."
- " dost thou not know what i did when thou leftest me ?"
then she stepped up to him , and kissed him on his left cheek , and in a moment it was as if scales fell from his eyes , and he recognized the true bride .
" come ," said he to her , " here i stay no longer ," gave her his hand , and led her down to the carriage .
the horses hurried away to the magic castle as if the wind had been harnessed to the carriage .
the illuminated windows already shone in the distance .
when they drove past the lime - tree , countless glow - worms were swarming about it .
it shook its branches , and sent forth their fragrance .
on the steps flowers were blooming , and the room echoed with the song of strange birds , but in the hall the entire court was assembled , and the priest was waiting to marry the bridegroom to the true bride .
