there was once on a time a far - sighted , crafty peasant whose tricks were much talked about .
the best story is , however , how he once got hold of the devil , and made a fool of him .
the peasant had one day been working in his field , and as twilight had set in , was making ready for the journey home , when he saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of his field , and when , full of astonishment , he went up to it , a little black devil was sitting on the live coals .
" thou dost indeed sit upon a treasure !"
said the peasant .
" yes , in truth ," replied the devil , " on a treasure which contains more gold and silver than thou hast ever seen in thy life !"
- " the treasure lies in my field and belongs to me ," said the peasant .
" it is thine ," answered the devil , " if thou wilt for two years give me the half of everything thy field produces .
money i have enough of , but i have a desire for the fruits of the earth ."
the peasant agreed to the bargain .
" in order , however , that no dispute may arise about the division ," said he , " everything that is above ground shall belong to thee , and what is under the earth to me ."
the devil was quite satisfied with that , but the cunning peasant had sown turnips . now when the time for harvest came , the devil appeared and wanted to take away his crop ; but he found nothing but the yellow withered leaves , while the peasant , full of delight , was digging up his turnips .
" thou hast had the best of it for once ," said the devil , " but the next time that won ' t do .
what grows above ground shall be thine , and what is under it , mine ."
- " i am willing ," replied the peasant ; but when the time came to sow , he did not again sow turnips , but wheat .
the grain became ripe , and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks down to the ground .
when the devil came , he found nothing but the stubble , and went away in a fury down into a cleft in the rocks .
" that is the way to cheat the devil ," said the peasant , and went and fetched away the treasure .
