there was once upon a time a princess , who , high under the battlements in her castle , had an apartment with twelve windows , which looked out in every possible direction , and when she climbed up to it and looked around her , she could inspect her whole kingdom .
when she looked out of the first , her sight was more keen than that of any other human being ; from the second she could see still better , from the third more distinctly still , and so it went on , until the twelfth , from which she saw everything above the earth and under the earth , and nothing at all could be kept secret from her .
moreover , as she was haughty , and would be subject to no one , but wished to keep the dominion for herself alone , she caused it to be proclaimed that no one should ever be her husband who could not conceal himself from her so effectually , that it should be quite impossible for her to find him .
he who tried this , however , and was discovered by her , was to have his head struck off , and stuck on a post .
ninety - seven posts with the heads of dead men were already standing before the castle , and no one had come forward for a long time .
the princess was delighted , and thought to herself , " now i shall be free as long as i live ."
then three brothers appeared before her , and announced to her that they were desirous of trying their luck .
the eldest believed he would be quite safe if he crept into a lime - pit , but she saw him from the first window , made him come out , and had his head cut off .
the second crept into the cellar of the palace , but she perceived him also from the first window , and his fate was sealed .
his head was placed on the nine and ninetieth post .
then the youngest came to her and entreated her to give him a day for consideration , and also to be so gracious as to overlook it if she should happen to discover him twice , but if he failed the third time , he would look on his life as over .
as he was so handsome , and begged so earnestly , she said , " yes , i will grant thee that , but thou wilt not succeed ."
next day he meditated for a long time how he should hide himself , but all in vain .
then he seized his gun and went out hunting .
he saw a raven , took a good aim at him , and was just going to fire , when the bird cried , " don ' t shoot ; i will make it worth thy while not ."
he put his gun down , went on , and came to a lake where he surprised a large fish which had come up from the depths below to the surface of the water .
when he had aimed at it , the fish cried , " don ' t shoot , and i will make it worth thy while ."
he allowed it to dive down again , went onwards , and met a fox which was lame .
he fired and missed it , and the fox cried , " you had much better come here and draw the thorn out of my foot for me ."
he did this ; but then he wanted to kill the fox and skin it , the fox said , " stop , and i will make it worth thy while ."
the youth let him go , and then as it was evening , returned home .
next day he was to hide himself ; but howsoever much he puzzled his brains over it , he did not know where .
he went into the forest to the raven and said , " i let thee live on , so now tell me where i am to hide myself , so that the king ' s daughter shall not see me ."
the raven hung his head and thought it over for a longtime .
at length he croaked , " i have it ."
he fetched an egg out of his nest , cut it into two parts , and shut the youth inside it ; then made it whole again , and seated himself on it .
when the king ' s daughter went to the first window she could not discover him , nor could she from the others , and she began to be uneasy , but from the eleventh she saw him .
she ordered the raven to be shot , and the egg to be brought and broken , and the youth was forced to come out .
she said , " for once thou art excused , but if thou dost not do better than this , thou art lost !"
next day he went to the lake , called the fish to him and said , " i suffered thee to live , now tell me where to hide myself so that the king ' s daughter may not see me ."
the fish thought for a while , and at last cried , " i have it !
i will shut thee up in my stomach ."
he swallowed him , and went down to the bottom of the lake .
the king ' s daughter looked through her windows , and even from the eleventh did not see him , and was alarmed ; but at length from the twelfth she saw him .
she ordered the fish to be caught and killed , and then the youth appeared .
every one can imagine what a state of mind he was in .
she said , " twice thou art forgiven , but be sure that thy head will be set on the hundredth post .
" on the last day , he went with a heavy heart into the country , and met the fox .
" thou knowest how to find all kinds of hiding - places ," said he ; " i let thee live , now advise me where i shall hide myself so that the king ' s daughter shall not discover me ."
- " that ' s a hard task ," answered the fox , looking very thoughtful .
at length he cried , " i have it !"
and went with him to a spring , dipped himself in it , and came out as a stall - keeper in the market , and dealer in animals .
the youth had to dip himself in the water also , and was changed into a small sea - hare .
the merchant went into the town , and showed the pretty little animal , and many persons gathered together to see it .
at length the king ' s daughter came likewise , and as she liked it very much , she bought it , and gave the merchant a good deal of money for it .
before he gave it over to her , he said to it , " when the king ' s daughter goes to the window , creep quickly under the braids of he hair ."
and now the time arrived when she was to search for him .
she went to one window after another in turn , from the first to the eleventh , and did not see him .
when she did not see him from the twelfth either , she was full of anxiety and anger , and shut it down with such violence that the glass in every window shivered into a thousand pieces , and the whole castle shook .
she went back and felt the sea - hare beneath the braids of her hair .
then she seized it , and threw it on the ground exclaiming , " away with thee , get out of my sight !"
it ran to the merchant , and both of them hurried to the spring , wherein they plunged , and received back their true forms .
the youth thanked the fox , and said , " the raven and the fish are idiots compared with thee ; thou knowest the right tune to play , there is no denying that !"
the youth went straight to the palace .
the princess was already expecting him , and accommodated herself to her destiny .
the wedding was solemnized , and now he was king , and lord of all the kingdom .
he never told her where he had concealed himself for the third time , and who had helped him , so she believed that he had done everything by his own skill , and she had a great respect for him , for she thought to herself , " he is able to do more than i ."
