a young drummer went out quite alone one evening into the country , and came to a lake on the shore of which he perceived three pieces of white linen lying .
" what fine linen ," said he , and put one piece in his pocket .
he returned home , thought no more of what he had found , and went to bed .
just as he was going to sleep , it seemed to him as if some one was saying his name .
he listened , and was aware of a soft voice which cried to him : " drummer , drummer , wake up !"
as it was a dark night he could see no one , but it appeared to him that a figure was hovering about his bed .
" what do you want ?"
he asked .
" give me back my dress ," answered the voice , " that you took away from me last evening by the lake ."
- " you shall have it back again ," said the drummer , " if you will tell me who you are ."
- " ah ," replied the voice , " i am the daughter of a mighty king ; but i have fallen into the power of a witch , and am shut up on the glass - mountain .
i have to bathe in the lake every day with my two sisters , but i cannot fly back again without my dress .
my sisters have gone away , but i have been forced to stay behind .
i entreat you to give me my dress back ."
- " be easy , poor child ," said the drummer .
" i will willingly give it back to you ."
he took it out of his pocket , and reached it to her in the dark .
she snatched it in haste , and wanted to go away with it .
" stop a moment , perhaps i can help you ."
- " you can only help me by ascending the glass - mountain , and freeing me from the power of the witch .
but you cannot come to the glass - mountain , and indeed if you were quite close to it you could not ascend it ."
- " when i want to do a thing i always can do it ," said the drummer , " i am sorry for you , and have no fear of anything .
but i do not know the way which leads to the glass - mountain ."
- " the road goes through the great forest , in which the man - eaters live ," she answered , " and more than that , i dare not tell you ."
and then he heard her wings quiver , as she flew away . by daybreak the drummer arose , buckled on his drum , and went without fear straight into the forest .
after he had walked for a while without seeing any giants , he thought to himself , i must waken up the sluggards , and he hung his drum before him , and beat such a reveille ‚ that the birds flew out of the trees with loud cries .
it was not long before a giant who had been lying sleeping among the grass , rose up , and was as tall as a fir - tree .
" wretch !"
cried he , " what art thou drumming here for , and wakening me out of my best sleep ?"
- " i am drumming ," he replied , " because i want to show the way to many thousands who are following me ."
- " what do they want in my forest ?"
demanded the giant .
" they want to put an end to thee , and cleanse the forest of such a monster as thou art !"
- " oh !"
said the giant , " i will trample you all to death like so many ants ."
- " dost thou think thou canst do anything against us ?"
said the drummer ; " if thou stoopest to take hold of one , he will jump away and hide himself ; but when thou art lying down and sleeping , they will come forth from every thicket , and creep up to thee .
every one of them has a hammer of steel in his belt , and with that they will beat in thy skull ."
the giant grew angry and thought , if i meddle with the crafty folk , it might turn out badly for me .
i can strangle wolves and bears , but i cannot protect myself from these earth - worms .
" listen , little fellow ," said he , " go back again , and i will promise you that for the future i will leave you and your comrades in peace , and if there is anything else you wish for , tell me , for i am quite willing to do something to please you ."
- " thou hast long legs ," said the drummer , " and canst run quicker than i ; carry me to the glass - mountain , and i will give my followers a signal to go back , and they shall leave thee in peace this time ."
- " come here , worm ," said the giant ; " seat thyself on my shoulder , i will carry thee where thou wishest to be ."
the giant lifted him up , and the drummer began to beat his drum up aloft to his heart ' s delight .
the giant thought , that is the signal for the other people to turn back .
after a while , a second giant was standing in the road , who took the drummer from the first , and stuck him in his button - hole .
the drummer laid hold of the button , which was as large as a dish , held on by it , and looked merrily around .
then they came to a third giant , who took him out of the button - hole , and set him on the rim of his hat .
then the drummer walked backwards and forwards up above , and looked over the trees , and when he perceived a mountain in the blue distance , he thought , that must be the glass - mountain , and so it was .
the giant only made two steps more , and they reached the foot of the mountain , where the giant put him down .
the drummer demanded to be put on the summit of the glass - mountain , but the giant shook his head , growled something in his beard , and went back into the forest . and now the poor drummer was standing before the mountain , which was as high as if three mountains were piled on each other , and at the same time as smooth as a looking - glass , and did not know how to get up it .
he began to climb , but that was useless , for he always slipped back again .
if one was a bird now , thought he , but what was the good of wishing , no wings grew for him .
whilst he was standing thus , not knowing what to do , he saw , not far from him , two men who were struggling fiercely together .
he went up to them and saw that they were disputing about a saddle which was lying on the ground before them , and which both of them wanted to have .
" what fools you are ," said he , " to quarrel about a saddle , when you have not a horse for it !"
- " the saddle is worth fighting about ," answered one of the men , " whosoever sits on it , and wishes himself in any place , even if it should be the very end of the earth , gets there the instant he has uttered the wish .
the saddle belongs to us in common .
it is my turn to ride on it , but that other man will not let me do it ."
- " i will soon decide the quarrel ," said the drummer , and he went to a short distance and stuck a white rod in the ground .
then he came back and said : " now run to the goal , and whoever gets there first , shall ride first ."
both put themselves into a trot , but hardly had they gone a couple of steps before the drummer swung himself on the saddle , wished himself on the glass - mountain , and before any one could turn round , he was there .
on the top of the mountain was a plain ; there stood an old stone house , and in front of the house lay a great fish - pond , but behind it was a dark forest .
he saw neither men nor animals ; everything was quiet ; only the wind rustled amongst the trees , and the clouds moved by quite close above his head .
he went to the door and knocked .
when he had knocked for the third time , an old woman with a brown face and red eyes opened the door .
she had spectacles on her long nose , and looked sharply at him ; then she asked what he wanted .
" entrance , food , and a bed for the night ," replied the drummer .
" that thou shalt have ," said the old woman , " if thou wilt perform three services in return ."
- " why not ?"
he answered , " i am not afraid of any kind of work , however hard it may be ."
the old woman let him go in , and gave him some food and a good bed at night .
the next morning when he had had his sleep out , she took a thimble from her wrinkled finger , reached it to the drummer , and said : " go to work now , and empty out the pond with this thimble ; but thou must have it done before night , and must have sought out all the fishes which are in the water and laid them side by side , according to their kind and size ."
- " that is strange work ," said the drummer , but he went to the pond , and began to empty it .
he baled the whole morning ; but what can any one do to a great lake with a thimble , even if he were to bale for a thousand years ?
when it was noon , he thought , it is all useless , and whether i work or not it will come to the same thing .
so he gave it up and sat down .
then came a maiden out of the house who set a little basket with food before him , and said : " what ails thee , that thou sittest so sadly here ?"
he looked at her , and saw that she was wondrously beautiful .
" ah ," said he , " i cannot finish the first piece of work , how will it be with the others ?
i came forth to seek a king ' s daughter who is said to dwell here , but i have not found her , and i will go farther ."
- " stay here ," said the maiden , " i will help thee out of thy difficulty .
thou art tired , lay thy head in my lap , and sleep .
when thou awakest again , thy work will be done ."
the drummer did not need to be told that twice .
as soon as his eyes were shut , she turned a wishing - ring and said : " rise , water .
fishes , come out ."
instantly the water rose on high like a white mist , and moved away with the other clouds , and the fishes sprang on the shore and laid themselves side by side each according to his size and kind .
when the drummer awoke , he saw with amazement that all was done .
but the maiden said : " one of the fish is not lying with those of its own kind , but quite alone ; when the old woman comes to - night and sees that all she demanded has been done , she will ask thee : what is this fish lying alone for ?
then throw the fish in her face , and say : this one shall be for thee , old witch ."
in the evening the witch came , and when she had put this question , he threw the fish in her face .
she behaved as if she did not remark it , and said nothing , but looked at him with malicious eyes .
next morning she said : " yesterday it was too easy for thee , i must give thee harder work .
today thou must hew down the whole of the forest , split the wood into logs , and pile them up , and everything must be finished by the evening ."
she gave him an axe , a mallet , and two wedges .
but the axe was made of lead , and the mallet and wedges were of tin .
when he began to cut , the edge of the axe turned back , and the mallet and wedges were beaten out of shape .
he did not know how to manage , but at mid - day the maiden came once more with his dinner and comforted him .
" lay thy head on my lap ," said she , " and sleep ; when thou awakest , thy work will be done ."
she turned her wishing - ring , and in an instant the whole forest fell down with a crash , the wood split , and arranged itself in heaps , and it seemed just as if unseen giants were finishing the work .
when he awoke , the maiden said : " dost thou see that the wood is piled up and arranged , one bough alone remains ; but when the old woman comes this evening and asks thee about that bough , give her a blow with it , and say : that is for thee , thou witch ."
the old woman came : " there thou seest how easy the work was !"
said she , " but for whom hast thou left that bough which is lying there still ?"
- " for thee , thou witch ," he replied , and gave her a blow with it .
but she pretended not to feel it , laughed scornfully , and said : " early tomorrow morning thou shalt arrange all the wood in one heap , set fire to it , and burn it ."
he rose at break of day , and began to pick up the wood , but how can a single man get a whole forest together ?
the work made no progress .
the maiden , however , did not desert him in his need .
she brought him his food at noon , and when he had eaten , he laid his head on her lap , and went to sleep .
when he awoke , the entire pile of wood was burning in one enormous flame , which stretched its tongues out into the sky .
" listen to me ," said the maiden , " when the witch comes , she will give thee all kinds of orders ; do whatever she asks thee without fear , and then she will not be able to get the better of thee , but if thou art afraid , the fire will lay hold of thee , and consume thee .
at last when thou hast done everything , seize her with both thy hands , and throw her into the midst of the fire ."
the maiden departed , and the old woman came sneaking up to him .
" oh , i am cold ," said she , " but that is a fire that burns ; it warms my old bones for me , and does me good !
but there is a log lying there which won ' t burn , bring it out for me .
when thou hast done that , thou art free , and mayst go where thou likest , come ; go in with a good will !"
the drummer did not reflect long ; he sprang into the midst of the flames , but they did not hurt him , and could not even singe a hair of his head .
he carried the log out , and laid it down .
hardly , however , had the wood touched the earth than it was transformed , and the beautiful maiden who had helped him in his need stood before him , and by the silken and shining golden garments which she wore , he knew right well that she was the king ' s daughter .
but the old woman laughed venomously , and said : " thou thinkest thou hast her safe , but thou hast not got her yet !"
just as she was about to fall on the maiden and take her away , the youth seized the old woman with both his hands , raised her up on high , and threw her into the jaws of the fire , which closed over her as if it were delighted that an old witch was to be burnt . then the king ' s daughter looked at the drummer , and when she saw that he was a handsome youth and remembered how he had risked his life to deliver her , she gave him her hand , and said : " thou hast ventured everything for my sake , but i also will do everything for thine .
promise to be true to me , and thou shalt be my husband .
we shall not want for riches , we shall have enough with what the witch has gathered together here ."
she led him into the house , where there were chests and coffers crammed with the old woman ' s treasures .
the maiden left the gold and silver where it was , and took only the precious stones .
she would not stay any longer on the glass - mountain , so the drummer said to her : " seat thyself by me on my saddle , and then we will fly down like birds ."
- " i do not like the old saddle ," said she , " i need only turn my wishing - ring and we shall be at home ."
- " very well , then ," answered the drummer , " then wish us in front of the town - gate ."
in the twinkling of an eye they were there , but the drummer said : " i will just go to my parents and tell them the news , wait for me outside here , i shall soon be back ."
- " ah ," said the king ' s daughter , " i beg thee to be careful .
on thy arrival do not kiss thy parents on the right cheek , or else thou wilt forget everything , and i shall stay behind here outside , alone and deserted ."
- " how can i forget thee ?"
said he , and promised her to come back very soon , and gave his hand upon it .
when he went into his father ' s house , he had changed so much that no one knew who he was , for the three days which he had passed on the glass - mountain had been three years .
then he made himself known , and his parents fell on his neck with joy , and his heart was so moved that he forgot what the maiden had said , and kissed them on both cheeks .
but when he had given them the kiss on the right cheek , every thought of the king ' s daughter vanished from him .
he emptied out his pockets , and laid handfuls of the largest jewels on the table .
the parents had not the least idea what to do with the riches .
then the father built a magnificent castle all surrounded by gardens , woods , and meadows as if a prince were going to live in it , and when it was ready , the mother said : " i have found a maiden for thee , and the wedding shall be in three days ."
the son was content to do as his parents desired . the poor king ' s daughter had stood for a long time without the town waiting for the return of the young man .
when evening came , she said : " he must certainly have kissed his parents on the right cheek , and has forgotten me ."
her heart was full of sorrow , she wished herself into a solitary little hut in a forest , and would not return to her father ' s court .
every evening she went into the town and passed the young man ' s house ; he often saw her , but he no longer knew her .
at length she heard the people saying : " the wedding will take place tomorrow ."
then she said : " i will try if i can win his heart back ."
on the first day of the wedding ceremonies , she turned her wishing - ring , and said : " a dress as bright as the sun ."
instantly the dress lay before her , and it was as bright as if it had been woven of real sunbeams .
when all the guests were assembled , she entered the hall .
every one was amazed at the beautiful dress , and the bride most of all , and as pretty dresses were the things she had most delight in , she went to the stranger and asked if she would sell it to her .
" not for money ," she answered , " but if i may pass the first night outside the door of the room where your betrothed sleeps , i will give it up to you ."
the bride could not overcome her desire and consented , but she mixed a sleeping - draught with the wine her betrothed took at night , which made him fall into a deep sleep .
when all had become quiet , the king ' s daughter crouched down by the door of the bedroom , opened it just a little , and cried :" drummer , drummer , i pray thee hear ! hast thou forgotten thou heldest me dear ? that on the glass - mountain we sat hour by hour ? that i rescued thy life from the witch ' s power ? didst thou not plight thy troth to me ? drummer , drummer , hearken to me !"
but it was all in vain , the drummer did not awake , and when morning dawned , the king ' s daughter was forced to go back again as she came .
on the second evening she turned her wishing - ring and said : " a dress as silvery as the moon ."
when she appeared at the feast in the dress which was as soft as moonbeams , it again excited the desire of the bride , and the king ' s daughter gave it to her for permission to pass the second night also , outside the door of the bedroom .
then in the stillness of the night , she cried :" drummer , drummer , i pray thee hear ! hast thou forgotten thy heldest me dear ? that on the glass - mountain we sat hour by hour ? that i rescued thy life from the witch ' s power ? didst thou not plight thy troth to me ? drummer , drummer , hearken to me !"
but the drummer , who was stupefied with the sleeping - draught , could not be aroused .
sadly next morning she went back to her hut in the forest .
but the people in the house had heard the lamentation of the stranger - maiden , and told the bridegroom about it .
they told him also that it was impossible that he could hear anything of it , because the maiden he was going to marry had poured a sleeping - draught into his wine .
on the third evening , the king ' s daughter turned her wishing - ring , and said : " a dress glittering like the stars ."
when she showed herself therein at the feast , the bride was quite beside herself with the splendour of the dress , which far surpassed the others , and she said : " i must , and will have it ."
the maiden gave it as she had given the others for permission to spend the night outside the bridegroom ' s door .
the bridegroom , however , did not drink the wine which was handed to him before he went to bed , but poured it behind the bed , and when everything was quiet , he heard a sweet voice which called to him :" drummer , drummer , i pray thee hear ! hast thou forgotten thou held me dear ? that on the glass - mountain we sat hour by hour ? that i rescued thy life from the witch ' s power ? didst thou not plight thy troth to me ? drummer , drummer , hearken to me !"
suddenly , his memory returned to him .
" ah ," cried he , " how can i have acted so unfaithfully ; but the kiss which in the joy of my heart i gave my parents , on the right cheek , that is to blame for it all , that is what stupefied me !"
he sprang up , took the king ' s daughter by the hand , and led her to his parents ' bed .
" this is my true bride ," said he , " if i marry the other , i shall do a great wrong ."
the parents , when they heard how everything had happened , gave their consent .
then the lights in the hall were lighted again , drums and trumpets were brought , friends and relations were invited to come , and the real wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing .
the first bride received the beautiful dresses as a compensation , and declared herself satisfied .
