there was once a fisherman and his wife who lived together in a hovel by the sea - shore , and the fisherman went out every day with his hook and line to catch fish , and he angled and angled . one day he was sitting with his rod and looking into the clear water , and he sat and sat . at last down went the line to the bottom of the water , and when he drew it up he found a great flounder on the hook .
and the flounder said to him , " fisherman , listen to me ; let me go , i am not a real fish but an enchanted prince .
what good shall i be to you if you land me ?
i shall not taste well ; so put me back into the water again , and let me swim away .
"" well ," said the fisherman , " no need of so many words about the matter , as you can speak i had much rather let you swim away .
" then he put him back into the clear water , and the flounder sank to the bottom , leaving a long streak of blood behind him .
then the fisherman got up and went home to his wife in their hovel .
" well , husband ," said the wife , " have you caught nothing to - day ?
"" no ," said the man " that is , i did catch a flounder , but as he said he was an enchanted prince , i let him go again .
"" then , did you wish for nothing ?
" said the wife .
" no ," said the man ; " what should i wish for ?
"" oh dear !"
said the wife ; " and it is so dreadful always to live in this evil - smelling hovel j you might as well have wished for a little cottage ; go again and call him ; tell him we want a little cottage , i daresay he will give it us ; go , and be quick .
" and when he went back , the sea was green and yellow , and not nearly so clear .
so he stood and said ," o man , o man !- if man you be , or flounder , flounder , in the sea - such a tiresome wife i ' ve got , for she wants what i do not .
" then the flounder came swimming up , and said ," now then , what does she want ?
"" oh ," said the man , " you know when i caught you my wife says i ought to have wished for something .
she does not want to live any longer in the hovel , and would rather have a cottage .
" go home with you ," said the flounder , " she has it already .
" so the man went home , and found , instead of the hovel , a little cottage , and his wife was sitting on a bench before the door .
and she took him by the hand , and said to him ," come in and see if this is not a great improvement .
" so they went in , and there was a little house - place and a beautiful little bedroom , a kitchen and larder , with all sorts of furniture , and iron and brass ware of the very best .
and at the back was a little yard with fowls and ducks , and a little garden full of green vegetables and fruit .
" look ," said the wife , " is not that nice ?
"" yes ," said the man , " if this can only last we shall be very well contented .
"" we will see about that ," said the wife .
and after a meal they went to bed . so all went well for a week or fortnight , when the wife said ," look here , husband , the cottage is really too confined , and the yard and garden are so small ; i think the flounder had better get us a larger house ; i should like very much to live in a large stone castle ; so go to your fish and he will send us a castle .
"" 0 my dear wife ," said the man , " the cottage is good enough ; what do we want a castle for ?
"" we want one ," said the wife ; " go along with you ; the flounder can give us one .
"" now , wife ," said the man , " the flounder gave us the cottage ; i do not like to go to him again , he may be angry .
"" go along ," said the wife , " he might just as well give us it as not ; do as i say !
" the man felt very reluctant and unwilling ; and he said to himself ," it is not the right thing to do ;" nevertheless he went . so when he came to the seaside , the water was purple and dark blue and grey and thick , and not green and yellow as before .
and he stood and said ," o man , o man !- if man you be , or flounder , flounder , in the sea - such a tiresome wife i ' ve got , for she wants what i do not .
"" now then , what does she want ?
" said the flounder .
" oh ," said the man , half frightened , " she wants to live in a large stone castle .
"" go home with you , she is already standing before the door ," said the flounder . then the man went home , as he supposed , but when he got there , there stood in the place of the cottage a great castle of stone , and his wife was standing on the steps , about to go in ; so she took him by the hand , and said ," let us enter .
" with that he went in with her , and in the castle was a great hall with a marble - pavement , and there were a great many servants , who led them through large doors , and the passages were decked with tapestry , and the rooms with golden chairs and tables , and crystal chandeliers hanging from the ceiling ; and all the rooms had carpets .
and the tables were covered with eatables and the best wine for any one who wanted them .
and at the back of the house was a great stable - yard for horses and cattle , and carriages of the finest ; besides , there was a splendid large garden , with the most beautiful flowers and fine fruit trees , and a pleasance full half a mile long , with deer and oxen and sheep , and everything that heart could wish for ." there !
" said the wife , " is not this beautiful ?
"" oh yes ," said the man , " if it will only last we can live in this fine castle and be very well contented .
"" we will see about that ," said the wife , " in the meanwhile we will sleep upon it ."
with that they went to bed . the next morning the wife was awake first , just at the break of day , and she looked out and saw from her bed the beautiful country lying all round .
the man took no notice of it , so she poked him in the side with her elbow , and said ," husband , get up and just look out of the window .
look , just think if we could be king over all this country .
just go to your fish and tell him we should like to be king .
"" now , wife ," said the man , " what should we be kings for ?
i don ' t want to be king .
"" well ," said the wife , " if you don ' t want to be king , i will be king .
"" now , wife ," said the man , " what do you want to be king for ?
i could not ask him such a thing .
"" why not ?"
said the wife , " you must go directly all the same ; i must be king .
" so the man went , very much put out that his wife should want to be king .
" it is not the right thing to do - not at all the right thing ," thought the man .
he did not at all want to go , and yet he went all the same . and when he came to the sea the water was quite dark grey , and rushed far inland , and had an ill smell .
and he stood and said ,'' o man , o man !- if man you be , or flounder , flounder , in the sea - such a tiresome wife i ' ve got , for she wants what i do not .
"" now then , what does she want ?"
said the fish .
" oh dear !
" said the man , " she wants to be king .
"" go home with you , she is so already ," said the fish . so the man went back , and as he came to the palace he saw it was very much larger , and had great towers and splendid gateways ; the herald stood before the door , and a number of soldiers with kettle - drums and trumpets . and when he came inside everything was of marble and gold , and there were many curtains with great golden tassels .
then he went through the doors of the saloon to where the great throne - room was , and there was his wife sitting upon a throne of gold and diamonds , and she had a great golden crown on , and the sceptre in her hand was of pure gold and jewels , and on each side stood six pages in a row , each one a head shorter than the other .
so the man went up to her and said ," well , wife , so now you are king !
"" yes ," said the wife , " now i am king .
" so then he stood and looked at her , and when he had gazed at her for some time he said ," well , wife , this is fine for you to be king !
now there is nothing more to wish for .
"" o husband !"
said the wife , seeming quite restless , " i am tired of this already .
go to your fish and tell him that now i am king i must be emperor .
"" now , wife ," said the man , " what do you want to be emperor for ?
"" husband ," said she , " go and tell the fish i want to be emperor .!
'" oh dear !"
said the man , " he could not do it - i cannot ask him such a thing .
there is but one emperor at a time ; the fish can ' t possibly make any one emperor - indeed he can ' t .
"" now , look here ," said the wife , " i am king , and you are only my husband , so will you go at once ?
go along !
for if he was able to make me king he is able to make me emperor ; and i will and must be emperor , so go along !
" so he was obliged to go ; and as he went he felt very uncomfortable about it , and he thought to himself ," it is not at all the right thing to do ; to want to be emperor is really going too far ; the flounder will soon be beginning to get tired of this .
" with that he came to the sea , and the water was quite black and thick , and the foam flew , and the wind blew , and the man was terrified .
but he stood and said ," o man , o man !- if man you be , or flounder , flounder , in the sea - such a tiresome wife i ' ve got , for she wants what i do not .
"" what is it now ?"
said the fish .
" oh dear !
" said the man , " my wife wants to be emperor .
"" go home with you ," said the fish , " she is emperor already .
" so the man went home , and found the castle adorned with polished marble and alabaster figures , and golden gates .
the troops were being marshalled before the door , and they were blowing trumpets and beating drums and cymbals ; and when he entered he saw barons and earls and dukes waiting about like servants ; and the doors were of bright gold .
and he saw his wife sitting upon a throne made of one entire piece of gold , and it was about two miles high ; and she had a great golden crown on , which was about three yards high , set with brilliants and carbuncles ; and in one hand she held the sceptre , and in the other the globe ; and on both sides of her stood pages in two rows , all arranged according to their size , from the most enormous giant of two miles high to the tiniest dwarf of the size of my little finger ; and before her stood earls and dukes in crowds .
so the man went up to her and said ," well , wife , so now you are emperor .
"" yes ," said she , " now i am emperor .
" then he went and sat down and had a good look at her , and then he said ," well now , wife , there is nothing left to be , now you are emperor .
"" what are you talking about , husband ?"
said she ; " i am emperor , and next i will be pope !
so go and tell the fish so .
"" oh dear !"
said the man , " what is it that you don ' t want ?
you can never become pope ; there is but one pope in christendom , and the fish can ' t possibly do it .
"" husband ," said she , " no more words about it ; i must and will be pope ; so go along to the fish .
"" now , wife ," said the man , " how can i ask him such a thing ?
it is too bad - it is asking a little too much ; and , besides , he could not do it .
"" what rubbish !"
said the wife ; '' if he could make me emperor he can make me pope .
go along and ask him ; i am emperor , and you are only my husband , so go you must .
" so he went , feeling very frightened , and he shivered and shook , and his knees trembled ; and there arose a great wind , and the clouds flew by , and it grew very dark , and the sea rose mountains high , and the ships were tossed about , and the sky was partly blue in the middle , but at the sides very dark and red , as in a great tempest .
and he felt very desponding , and stood trembling and said ," o man , o man !- if man you be , or flounder , flounder , in the sea - such a tiresome wife i ' ve got , for she wants what i do not .
"" well , what now ?"
said the fish .
" oh dear !"
said the man , " she wants to be pope .
"" go home with you , she is pope already ," said the fish . so he went home , and he found himself before a great church , with palaces all round .
he had to make his way through a crowd of people ; and when he got inside he found the place lighted up with thousands and thousands of lights ; and his wife was clothed in a golden garment , and sat upon a very high throne , and had three golden crowns on , all in the greatest priestly pomp ; and on both sides of her there stood two rows of lights of all sizes - from the size of the longest tower to the smallest rushlight , and all the emperors and kings were kneeling before her and kissing her foot .
" well , wife ," said the man , and sat and stared at her , " so you are pope .
"" yes ," said she , " now i am pope !
" and he went on gazing at her till he felt dazzled , as if he were sitting in the sun .
and after a little time he said ," well , now , wife , what is there left to be , now you are pope ?
" and she sat up very stiff and straight , and said nothing . and he said again , " well , wife , i hope you are contented at last with being pope ; you can be nothing more .
"" we will see about that ," said the wife .
with that they both went to bed ; but she was as far as ever from being contented , and she could not get to sleep for thinking of what she should like to be next . the husband , however , slept as fast as a top after his busy day ; but the wife tossed and turned from side to side the whole night through , thinking all the while what she could be next , but nothing would occur to her ; and when she saw the red dawn she slipped off the bed , and sat before the window to see the sun rise , and as it came up she said ," ah , i have it !
what if i should make the sun and moon to rise - husband !
" she cried , and stuck her elbow in his ribs , " wake up , and go to your fish , and tell him t want power over the sun and moon .
" the man was so fast asleep that when he started up he fell out of bed .
then he shook himself together , and opened his eyes and said ," oh ,- wife , what did you say ?
"" husband ," said she , " if i cannot get the power of making the sun and moon rise when i want them , i shall never have another quiet hour .
go to the fish and tell him so .
"" o wife !"
said the man , and fell on his knees to her , " the fish can really not do that for you .
i grant you he could make you emperor and pope ; do be contented with that , i beg of you .
" and she became wild with impatience , and screamed out ," i can wait no longer , go at once !
" and so off he went as well as he could for fright .
and a dreadful storm arose , so that he could hardly keep his feet ; and the houses and trees were blown down , and the mountains trembled , and rocks fell in the sea ; the sky was quite black , and it thundered and lightened ; and the waves , crowned with foam , ran mountains high .
so he cried out , without being able to hear his own words ," o man , o man !- if man you be , or flounder , flounder , in the sea - such a tiresome wife i ' ve got , for she wants what i do not .
"" well , what now ?"
said the flounder .
" oh dear !"
said the man , " she wants to order about the sun and moon .
"" go home with you !
" said the flounder , " you will find her in the old hovel .
" and there they are sitting to this very day .
