there was once on a time a king who had a daughter , and he caused a glass mountain to be made , and said that whosoever could cross to the other side of it without falling should have his daughter to wife .
then there was one who loved the king ' s daughter , and he asked the king if he might have her .
" yes ," said the king ; " if you can cross the mountain without falling , you shall have her ."
and the princess said she would go over it with him , and would hold him if he were about to fall .
so they set out together to go over it , and when they were half way up the princess slipped and fell , and the glass - mountain opened and shut her up inside it , and her betrothed could not see where she had gone , for the mountain closed immediately .
then he wept and lamented much , and the king was miserable too , and had the mountain broken open where she had been lost , and though the would be able to get her out again , but they could not find the place into which she had fallen .
meanwhile the king ' s daughter had fallen quite deep down into the earth into a great cave .
an old fellow with a very long gray beard came to meet her , and told her that if she would be his servant and do everything he bade her , she might live , if not he would kill her .
so she did all he bade her .
in the mornings he took his ladder out of his pocket , and set it up against the mountain and climbed to the top by its help , and then he drew up the ladder after him .
the princess had to cook his dinner , make his bed , and do all his work , and when he came home again he always brought with him a heap of gold and silver .
when she had lived with him for many years , and had grown quite old , he called her mother mansrot , and she had to call him old rinkrank .
then once when he was out , and she had made his bed and washed his dishes , she shut the doors and windows all fast , and there was one little window through which the light shone in , and this she left open .
when old rinkrank came home , he knocked at his door , and cried , " mother mansrot , open the door for me ."
- " no ," said she , " old rinkrank , i will not open the door for thee ."
then he said ," here stand i , poor rinkrank , on my seventeen long shanks , on my weary , worn - out foot , wash my dishes , mother mansrot .
"" i have washed thy dishes already ," said she .
then again he said ," here stand i , poor rinkrank , on my seventeen long shanks , on my weary , worn - out foot , make me my bed , mother mansrot .
"" i have made thy bed already ," said she .
then again he said ," here stand i , poor rinkrank , on my seventeen long shanks , on my weary , worn - out foot , open the door , mother mansrot .
" then he ran all round his house , and saw that the little window was open , and thought , " i will look in and see what she can be about , and why she will not open the door for me ."
he tried to peep in , but could not get his head through because of his long beard .
so he first put his beard through the open window , but just as he had got it through , mother mansrot came by and pulled the window down with a cord which she had tied to it , and his beard was shut fast in it .
then he began to cry most piteously , for it hurt him very much , and to entreat her to release him again .
but she said not until he gave her the ladder with which he ascended the mountain .
then , whether he would or not , he had to tell her where the ladder was .
and she fastened a very long ribbon to the window , and then she set up the ladder , and ascended the mountain , and when she was at the top of it she opened the window .
she went to her father , and told him all that had happened to her .
the king rejoiced greatly , and her betrothed was still there , and they went and dug up the mountain , and found old rinkrank inside it with all his gold and silver .
then the king had old rinkrank put to death , and took all his gold and silver .
the princess married her betrothed , and lived right happily in great magnificence and joy .
