there was once a king who had a son who asked in marriage the daughter of a mighty king ; she was called maid maleen , and was very beautiful .
as her father wished to give her to another , the prince was rejected ; but as they both loved each other with all their hearts , they would not give each other up , and maid maleen said to her father , " i can and will take no other for my husband ."
then the king flew into a passion , and ordered a dark tower to be built , into which no ray of sunlight or moonlight should enter .
when it was finished , he said , " therein shalt thou be imprisoned for seven years , and then i will come and see if thy perverse spirit is broken ."
meat and drink for the seven years were carried into the tower , and then she and her waiting - woman were led into it and walled up , and thus cut off from the sky and from the earth .
there they sat in the darkness , and knew not when day or night began .
the king ' s son often went round and round the tower , and called their names , but no sound from without pierced through the thick walls .
what else could they do but lament and complain ?
meanwhile the time passed , and by the diminution of the food and drink they knew that the seven years were coming to an end .
they thought the moment of their deliverance was come ; but no stroke of the hammer was heard , no stone fell out of the wall , and it seemed to maid maleen that her father had forgotten her .
as they only had food for a short time longer , and saw a miserable death awaiting them , maid maleen said , " we must try our last chance , and see if we can break through the wall ."
she took the bread - knife , and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone , and when she was tired , the waiting - maid took her turn .
with great labour they succeeded in getting out one stone , and then a second , and a third , and when three days were over the first ray of light fell on their darkness , and at last the opening was so large that they could look out .
the sky was blue , and a fresh breeze played on their faces ; but how melancholy everything looked all around !
her father ' s castle lay in ruins , the town and the villages were , so far as could be seen , destroyed by fire , the fields far and wide laid to waste , and no human being was visible .
when the opening in the wall was large enough for them to slip through , the waiting - maid sprang down first , and then maid maleen followed .
but where were they to go ?
the enemy had ravaged the whole kingdom , driven away the king , and slain all the inhabitants .
they wandered forth to seek another country , but nowhere did they find a shelter , or a human being to give them a mouthful of bread , and their need was so great that they were forced to appease their hunger with nettles .
when , after long journeying , they came into another country , they tried to get work everywhere ; but wherever they knocked they were turned away , and no one would have pity on them .
at last they arrived in a large city and went to the royal palace .
there also they were ordered to go away , but at last the cook said that they might stay in the kitchen and be scullions . the son of the king in whose kingdom they were , was , however , the very man who had been betrothed to maid maleen .
his father had chosen another bride for him , whose face was as ugly as her heart was wicked .
the wedding was fixed , and the maiden had already arrived ; but because of her great ugliness , however , she shut herself in her room , and allowed no one to see her , and maid maleen had to take her her meals from the kitchen .
when the day came for the bride and the bridegroom to go to church , she was ashamed of her ugliness , and afraid that if she showed herself in the streets , she would be mocked and laughed at by the people .
then said she to maid maleen , " a great piece of luck has befallen thee .
i have sprained my foot , and cannot well walk through the streets ; thou shalt put on my wedding - clothes and take my place ; a greater honour than that thou canst not have !"
maid maleen , however , refused it , and said , " i wish for no honour which is not suitable for me ."
it was in vain , too , that the bride offered her gold .
at last she said angrily , " if thou dost not obey me , it shall cost thee thy life .
i have but to speak the word , and thy head will lie at thy feet ."
then she was forced to obey , and put on the bride ' s magnificent clothes and all her jewels .
when she entered the royal hall , every one was amazed at her great beauty , and the king said to his son , " this is the bride whom i have chosen for thee , and whom thou must lead to church ."
the bridegroom was astonished , and thought , " she is like my maid maleen , and i should believe that it was she herself , but she has long been shut up in the tower , or dead ."
he took her by the hand and led her to church .
on the way was a nettle - plant , and she said , " oh , nettle - plant , little nettle - plant , what dost thou here alone ? i have known the timewhen i ate thee unboiled , when i ate thee unroasted .
"" what art thou saying ?"
asked the king ' s son .
" nothing ," she replied , " i was only thinking of maid maleen ."
he was surprised that she knew about her , but kept silence .
when they came to the foot - plank into the churchyard , she said , " foot - bridge , do not break , i am not the true bride .
"" what art thou saying there ?"
asked the king ' s son .
" nothing ," she replied , " i was only thinking of maid maleen ."
- " dost thou know maid maleen ?"
- " no ," she answered , " how should i know her ; i have only heard of her ."
when they came to the church - door , she said once more ," church - door , break not , i am not the true bride .
"" what art thou saying there ?"
asked he .
" ah ," she answered , " i was only thinking of maid maleen ."
then he took out a precious chain , put it round her neck , and fastened the clasp .
thereupon they entered the church , and the priest joined their hands together before the altar , and married them .
he led her home , but she did not speak a single word the whole way .
when they got back to the royal palace , she hurried into the bride ' s chamber , put off the magnificent clothes and the jewels , dressed herself in her gray gown , and kept nothing but the jewel on her neck , which she had received from the bridegroom . when the night came , and the bride was to be led into the prince ' s apartment , she let her veil fall over her face , that he might not observe the deception .
as soon as every one had gone away , he said to her , " what didst thou say to the nettle - plant which was growing by the wayside ?"
" to which nettle - plant ?"
asked she ; " i don ' t talk to nettle - plants ."
- " if thou didst not do it , then thou art not the true bride ," said he .
so she bethought herself , and said , " i must go out unto my maid , who keeps my thoughts for me .
" she went out and sought maid maleen .
" girl , what hast thou been saying to the nettle ?"
- " i said nothing but ," oh , nettle - plant , little nettle - plant , what dost thou here alone ? i have known the timewhen i ate thee unboiled , when i ate thee unroasted .
" the bride ran back into the chamber , and said , " i know now what i said to the nettle ," and she repeated the words which she had just heard .
" but what didst thou say to the foot - bridge when we went over it ?"
asked the king ' s son .
" to the foot - bridge ?"
she answered .
" i don ' t talk to foot - bridges ."
- " then thou art not the true bride ."
she again said ," i must go out unto my maid , who keeps my thoughts for me ," and ran out and found maid maleen , " girl , what didst thou say to the foot - bridge ?
"" i said nothing but ," foot - bridge , do not break , i am not the true bride .
"" that costs thee thy life !"
cried the bride , but she hurried into the room , and said , " i know now what i said to the foot - bridge ," and she repeated the words .
" but what didst thou say to the church - door ?"
- " to the church - door ?"
she replied ; " i don ' t talk to church - doors ."
- " then thou art not the true bride ."
she went out and found maid maleen , and said , " girl , what didst thou say to the church - door ?"
" i said nothing but , " church - door , break not , i am not the true bride .
"" that will break thy neck for thee !"
cried the bride , and flew into a terrible passion , but she hastened back into the room , and said , " i know now what i said to the church - door ," and she repeated the words .
" but where hast thou the jewel which i gave thee at the church - door ?"
- " what jewel ?"
she answered ; " thou didst not give me any jewel ."
- " i myself put it round thy neck , and i myself fastened it ; if thou dost not know that , thou art not the true bride ."
he drew the veil from her face , and when he saw her immeasurable ugliness , he sprang back terrified , and said , " how comest thou here ?
who art thou ?"
- " i am thy betrothed bride , but because i feared lest the people should mock me when they saw me out of doors , i commanded the scullery - maid to dress herself in my clothes , and to go to church instead of me ."
- " where is the girl ?"
said he ; " i want to see her , go and bring her here ."
she went out and told the servants that the scullery - maid was an impostor , and that they must take her out into the court - yard and strike off her head .
the servants laid hold of maid maleen and wanted to drag her out , but she screamed so loudly for help , that the king ' s son heard her voice , hurried out of his chamber and ordered them to set the maiden free instantly .
lights were brought , and then he saw on her neck the gold chain which he had given her at the church - door .
" thou art the true bride , said he , " who went with me to the church ; come with me now to my room ."
when they were both alone , he said , " on the way to church thou didst name maid maleen , who was my betrothed bride ; if i could believe it possible , i should think she was standing before me thou art like her in every respect ."
she answered , " i am maid maleen , who for thy sake was imprisoned seven years in the darkness , who suffered hunger and thirst , and has lived so long in want and poverty .
to - day , however , the sun is shining on me once more .
i was married to thee in the church , and i am thy lawful wife ."
then they kissed each other , and were happy all the days of their lives .
the false bride was rewarded for what she had done by having her head cut off . the tower in which maid maleen had been imprisoned remained standing for a long time , and when the children passed by it they sang , " kling , klang , gloria . who sits within this tower ? a king ' s daughter , she sits within , a sight of her i cannot win , the wall it will not break , the stone cannot be pierced . little hans , with your coat so gay , follow me , follow me , fast as you may ."
