a soldier who is afraid of nothing , troubles himself about nothing .
one of this kind had received his discharge , and as he had learnt no trade and could earn nothing , he travelled about and begged alms of kind people .
he had an old waterproof on his back , and a pair of riding - boots of buffalo - leather which were still left to him .
one day he was walking he knew not where , straight out into the open country , and at length came to a forest .
he did not know where he was , but saw sitting on the trunk of a tree , which had been cut down , a man who was well dressed and wore a green shooting - coat .
the soldier shook hands with him , sat down on the grass by his side , and stretched out his legs .
" i see thou hast good boots on , which are well blacked ," said he to the huntsman ; " but if thou hadst to travel about as i have , they would not last long .
look at mine , they are of buffalo - leather , and have been worn for a long time , but in them i can go through thick and thin ."
after a while the soldier got up and said , " i can stay no longer , hunger drives me onwards ; but , brother bright - boots , where does this road lead to ?"
- " i don ' t know that myself ," answered the huntsman , " i have lost my way in the forest ."
- " then thou art in the same plight as i ," said the soldier ; " birds of a feather flock together , let us remain together , and seek our way ."
the huntsman smiled a little , and they walked on further and further , until night fell .
" we do not get out of the forest ," said the soldier , " but there in the distance i see a light shining , which will help us to something to eat ."
they found a stone house , knocked at the door , and an old woman opened it .
" we are looking for quarters for the night ," said the soldier , " and some lining for our stomachs , for mine is as empty as an old knapsack ."
- " you cannot stay here ," answered the old woman ; " this is a robber ' s house , and you would do wisely to get away before they come home , or you will be lost ."
- " it won ' t be so bad as that ," answered the soldier , " i have not had a mouthful for two days , and whether i am murdered here or die of hunger in the forest is all the same to me .
i shall go in ."
the huntsman would not follow , but the soldier drew him in with him by the sleeve .
" come , my dear brother , we shall not come to an end so quickly as that !"
the old woman had pity on them and said , " creep in here behind the stove , and if they leave anything , i will give it to you on the sly when they are asleep ."
scarcely were they in the corner before twelve robbers came bursting in , seated themselves at the table which was already laid , and vehemently demanded some food .
the old woman brought in some great dishes of roast meat , and the robbers enjoyed that thoroughly .
when the smell of the food ascended the nostrils of the soldier , he said to the huntsman , " i cannot hold out any longer , i shall seat myself at the table , and eat with them ."
thou wilt bring us to destruction ," said the huntsman , and held him back by the arm .
but the soldier began to cough loudly .
when the robbers heard that , they threw away their knives and forks , leapt up , and discovered the two who were behind the stove .
" aha , gentlemen , are you in the corner ?"
cried they , " what are you doing here ?
have you been sent as spies ?
wait a while , and you shall learn how to fly on a dry bough ."
- " but do be civil ," said the soldier , " i am hungry , give me something to eat , and then you can do what you like with me ."
the robbers were astonished , and the captain said , " i see that thou hast no fear ; well , thou shalt have some food , but after that thou must die ."
- " we shall see ," said the soldier , and seated himself at the table , and began to cut away valiantly at the roast meat .
" brother brightboots , come and eat ," cried he to the huntsman ; " thou must be as hungry as i am , and cannot have better roast meat at home ," but the huntsman would not eat .
the robbers looked at the soldier in astonishment , and said , " the rascal uses no ceremony ."
after a while he said , " i have had enough food , now get me something good to drink ."
the captain was in the mood to humour him in this also , and called to the old woman , " bring a bottle out of the cellar , and mind it be of the best ."
the soldier drew the cork out with a loud noise , and then went with the bottle to the huntsman and said , " pay attention , brother , and thou shalt see something that will surprise thee ; i am now going to drink the health of the whole clan ."
then he brandished the bottle over the heads of the robbers , and cried , " long life to you all , but with your mouths open and your right hands lifted up ," and then he drank a hearty draught .
scarcely were the words said than they all sat motionless as if made of stone , and their mouths were open and their right hands stretched up in the air .
the huntsman said to the soldier , " i see that thou art acquainted with tricks of another kind , but now come and let us go home ."
- " oho , my dear brother , but that would be marching away far too soon ; we have conquered the enemy , and must first take the booty .
those men there are sitting fast , and are opening their mouths with astonishment , but they will not be allowed to move until i permit them .
come , eat and drink ."
the old woman had to bring another bottle of the best wine , and the soldier would not stir until he had eaten enough to last for three days .
at last when day came , he said , " now it is time to strike our tents , and that our march may be a short one , the old woman shall show us the nearest way to the town ."
when they had arrived there , he went to his old comrades , and said , " out in the forest i have found a nest full of gallows ' birds , come with me and we will take it ."
the soldier led them , and said to the huntsman , " thou must go back again with me to see how they shake when we seize them by the feet ."
he placed the men round about the robbers , and then he took the bottle , drank a mouthful , brandished it above them , and cried , " live again ."
instantly they all regained the power of movement , but were thrown down and bound hand and foot with cords .
then the soldier ordered them to be thrown into a cart as if they had been so many sacks , and said , " now drive them straight to prison ."
the huntsman , however , took one of the men aside and gave him another commission besides .
" brother bright - boots ," said the soldier , " we have safely routed the enemy and been well fed , now we will quietly walk behind them as if we were stragglers !"
when they approached the town , the soldier saw a crowd of people pouring through the gate of the town who were raising loud cries of joy , and waving green boughs in the air .
then he saw that the entire body - guard was coming up .
" what can this mean ?"
said he to the huntsman .
" dost thou not know ?"
he replied , " that the king has for a long time been absent from his kingdom , and that to - day he is returning , and every one is going to meet him ."
- " but where is the king ?"
said the soldier , " i do not see him ."
- " here he is ," answered the huntsman , " i am the king , and have announced my arrival ."
then he opened his hunting - coat , and his royal garments were visible .
the soldier was alarmed , and fell on his knees and begged him to forgive him for having in his ignorance treated him as an equal , and spoken to him by such a name .
but the king shook hands with him , and said , " thou art a brave soldier , and hast saved my life .
thou shalt never again be in want , i will take care of thee .
and if ever thou wouldst like to eat a piece of roast meat , as good as that in the robber ' s house , come to the royal kitchen .
but if thou wouldst drink a health , thou must first ask my permission ."
