one summer morning a little tailor was sitting on his board near the window , and working cheerfully with all his might , when an old woman came down the street crying , " good jelly to sell !
good jelly to sell !"
the cry sounded pleasant in the little tailor ' s ears , so he put his head out of the window , and called out , " here , my good woman , come here , if you want a customer .
" so the poor woman climbed the steps with her heavy basket , and was obliged to unpack and display all her pots to the tailor .
he looked at every one of them , and lifting all the lids , applied his nose to each , and said at last , " the jelly seems pretty good ; you may weigh me out four half ounces , or i don ' t mind having a quarter of a pound ."
the woman , who had expected to find a good customer , gave him what he asked for , but went off angry and grumbling .
" this jelly is the very thing for me ," cried the little tailor ; " it will give me strength and cunning ; " and he took down the bread from the cupboard , cut a whole round of the loaf , and spread the jelly on it , laid it near him , and went on stitching more gallantly than ever . all the while the scent of the sweet jelly was spreading throughout the room , where there were quantities of flies , who were attracted by it and flew to partake .
" now then , who asked you to come ?"
said the tailor , and drove the unbidden guests away .
but the flies , not understanding his language , were not to be got rid of like that , and returned in larger numbers than before .
then the tailor , not being able to stand it any longer , took from his chimney - corner a ragged cloth , and saying , " now , i ' ll let you have it !"
beat it among them unmercifully .
when he ceased , and counted the slain , he found seven lying dead before him .
" this is indeed somewhat ," he said , wondering at his own gallantry ; " the whole town shall know this ."
so he hastened to cut out a belt , and he stitched it ^ and put on it in large capitals " seven at one blow !
"" the town , did i say !"
said the little tailor ; " the whole world shall know it !"
and his heart quivered with joy , like a lamb ' s tail .
the tailor fastened the belt round him , and began to think of going out into the world , for his workshop seemed too small for his worship .
so he looked about in all the house for something that it would be useful to take with him , but he found nothing but an old cheese , which he put in his pocket .
outside the door he noticed that a bird had got caught in the bushes , so he took that and put it in his pocket with the cheese .
then he set out gallantly on his way , and as he was light and active he felt no fatigue . the way led over a mountain , and when he reached the topmost peak he saw a terrible giant sitting there , and looking about him at his ease .
the tailor went bravely up to him , called out to him , and said , " comrade , good day !
there you sit looking over the wide world !
i am on the way thither to seek my fortune : have you a fancy to go with me ?
" the giant looked at the tailor contemptuously , and said , " you little rascal !
you miserable fellow !"
- " that may be !"
answered the little tailor , and undoing his coat he showed the giant his belt ; " you can read there whether i am a man or not !"
the giant read : " seven at one blow !"
and thinking it meant men that the tailor had killed , felt at once more respect for the little fellow .
but as he wanted to prove him , he took up a stone and squeezed it so hard that water came out of it .
" now you can do that ," said the giant , " that is , if you have the strength for it .
"" that ' s not much ," said the little tailor , " i call that play ," and he put his hand in his pocket and took out the cheese and squeezed it , so that the whey ran out of it .
" well ," said he , " what do you think of that ?
" the giant did not know what to say to it , for he could not have believed it of the little man .
then the giant took up a stone and threw it so high that it was nearly out of sight .
" now , little fellow , suppose you do that !
"" well thrown ," said the tailor ; " but the stone fell back to earth again , i will throw you one that will never come back ."
so he felt in his pocket , took out the bird , and threw it into the air .
and the bird , when it found itself at liberty , took wing , flew off , and returned no more .
" what do you think of that , comrade ?"
asked the tailor .
" there is no doubt that you can throw ," said the giant ; " but we will see if you can carry ."
he led the little tailor to a mighty oak - tree which had been felled , and was lying on the ground , and said , " now , if you are strong enough , help me to carry this tree out of the wood .
"" willingly ," answered the little man ; " you take the trunk on your shoulders , i will take the branches with all their foliage , that is much the most difficult ."
so the giant took the trunk on his shoulders , and the tailor seated himself on a branch , and the giant , who could not see what he was doing , had the whole tree to carry , and the little man on it as well .
and the little man was very cheerful and merry , and whistled the tune : " there were three tailors riding by " as if carrying the tree was mere child ' s play .
the giant , when he had struggled on under his heavy load a part of the way , was tired out , and cried , " look here , i must let go the tree !
" the tailor jumped off quickly , and taking hold of the tree with both arms , as if he were carrying it , said to the giant , " you see you can ' t carry the tree though you are such a big fellow !
" they went on together a little farther , and presently they came to a cherry - tree , and the giant took hold of the topmost branches , where the ripest fruit hung , and pulling them downwards , gave them to the tailor to hold , bidding him eat .
but the little tailor was much too weak to hold the tree , and as the giant let go , the tree sprang back , and the tailor was caught up into the air .
and when he dropped down again without any damage , the giant said to him , " how is this ?
haven ' t you strength enough to hold such a weak sprig as that ?
"" it is not strength that is lacking ," answered the little tailor ; " how should it to one who has slain seven at one blow !
i just jumped over the tree because the hunters are shooting down there in the bushes .
you jump it too , if you can ."
the giant made the attempt , and not being able to vault the tree , he remained hanging in the branches , so that once more the little tailor got the better of him . then said the giant , " as you are such a gallant fellow , suppose you come with me to our den , and stay the night ."
the tailor was quite willing , and he followed him .
when they reached the den there sat some other giants by the fire , and each had a roasted sheep in his hand , and was eating it .
the little tailor looked round and thought , " there is more elbow - room here than in my workshop ."
and the giant showed him a bed , and told him he had better lie down upon it and go to sleep .
the bed was , however , too big for the tailor , so he did not stay in it , but crept into a corner to sleep . as soon as it was midnight the giant got up , took a great staff of iron and beat the bed through with one stroke , and supposed he had made an end of that grasshopper of a tailor . very early in the morning the giants went into the wood and forgot all about the little tailor , and when they saw him coming after them alive and merry , they were terribly frightened , and , thinking he was going to kill them , they ran away in all haste . so the little tailor marched on , always following his nose .
and after he had gone a great way he entered the courtyard belonging to a king ' s palace , and there he felt so overpowered with fatigue that he lay down and fell asleep .
in the meanwhile came various people , who looked at him very curiously , and read on his belt , " seven at one blow !"
- " oh !"
said they , " why should this great lord come here in time of peace ?
what a mighty champion he must be ."
then they went and told the king about him , and they thought that if war should break out what a worthy and useful man he would be , and that he ought not to be allowed to depart at any price . the king then summoned his council , and sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to beg him , so soon as he should wake up , to consent to serve in the king ' s army .
so the messenger stood and waited at the sleeper ' s side until his limbs began to stretch , and his eyes to open , and then he carried his answer back .
and the answer was , " that was the reason for which i came ," said the little tailor , " i am ready to enter the king ' s service ."
so he was received into it very honourably , and a separate dwelling set apart for him .
but the rest of the soldiers were very much set against the little tailor , and they wished him a thousand miles away .
" what shall be done about it ?"
they said among themselves ; " if we pick a quarrel and fight with him then seven of us will fall at each blow .
that will be of no good to us ."
so they came to a resolution , and went all together to the king to ask for their discharge .
" we never intended ," said they , " to serve with a man who kills seven at a blow ."
the king felt sorry to lose all his faithful servants because of one man , and he wished that he had never seen him , and would willingly get rid of him if he might .
but he did not dare to dismiss the little tailor for fear he should kill all the king ' s people , and place himself upon the throne . he thought a long while about it , and at last made up his mind what to do .
he sent for the little tailor , and told him that as he was so great a warrior he had a proposal to make to him .
he told him that in a wood in his dominions dwelt two giants , who did great damage by robbery , murder , and fire , and that no man durst go near them for fear of his life .
but that if the tailor should overcome and slay both these giants the king would give him his only daughter in marriage , and half his kingdom as dowry , and that a hundred horsemen should go with him to give him assistance .
" that would be something for a man like me 1 " thought the little tailor , " a beautiful princess and half a kingdom are not to be had every day .
" and he said to the king , " oh yes , i can soon overcome the giants , and yet have no need of the hundred horsemen ; he who can kill seven at one blow has no need to be afraid of two .
" so the little tailor set out , and the hundred horsemen followed him .
when he came to the border of the wood he said to his escort , " stay here while i go to attack the giants ."
then he sprang into the wood , and looked about him right and left .
after a while he caught sight of the two giants ; they were lying down under a tree asleep , and snoring so that all the branches shook .
the little tailor , all alive , filled both his pockets with stones and climbed up into the tree , and made his way to an overhanging bough , so that he could seat himself just above the sleepers ; and from there he let one stone after another fall on the chest of one of the giants .
for a long time the giant was quite unaware of this , but at last he waked up and pushed his comrade , and said , " what are you hitting me for ?
"" you are dreaming ," said the other , " i am not touching you ."
and they composed themselves again to sleep , and the tailor let fall a stone on the other giant .
" what can that be ?"
cried he , " what are you casting at me ?
"" i am casting nothing at you ," answered the first , grumbling .
they disputed about it for a while , but as they were tired , they gave it up at last , and their eyes closed once more .
then the little tailor began his game anew , picked out a heavier stone and threw it down with force upon the first giant ' s chest .
" this is too much !"
cried he , and sprang up like a madman and struck his companion such a blow that the tree shook above them .
the other paid him back with ready coin , and they fought with such fury that they tore up trees by their roots to use for weapons against each other , so that at last they both of them lay dead upon the ground .
and now the little tailor got down .
" another piece of luck !"
said he , " that the tree i was sitting in did not get torn up too , or else i should have had to jump like a squirrel from one tree to another ."
then he drew his sword and gave each of the giants a few hacks in the breast , and went back to the horsemen and said , " the deed is done , i have made an end of both of them : but it went hard with me , in the struggle they rooted up trees to defend themselves , but it was of no use , they had to do with a man who can kill seven at one blow .
"" then are you not wounded ?"
asked the horsemen .
" nothing of the sort !"
answered the tailor , " i have not turned a hair ."
the horsemen still would not believe it , and rode into the wood to see , and there they found the giants wallowing in their blood , and all about them lying the uprooted trees .
the little tailor then claimed the promised boon , but the king repented him of his offer , and he sought again how to rid himself of the hero .
" before you can possess my daughter and the half of my kingdom ," said he to the tailor , " you must perform another heroic act .
in the wood lives a unicorn who does great damage ; you must secure him .
"" a unicorn does not strike more terror into me than two giants .
seven at one blow !
- that is my way ," was the tailor ' s answer .
so , taking a rope and an axe with him , he went out into the wood , and told those who were ordered to attend him to wait outside . he had not far to seek , the unicorn soon came out and sprang at him , as if he would make an end of him without delay .
" softly , softly ," said he , " most haste , worst speed ," and remained standing until the animal came quite near , then he slipped quietly behind a tree .
the unicorn ran with all his might against the tree and stuck his horn so deep into the trunk that he could not get it out again , and so was taken .
" now i have you ," said the tailor , coming out from behind the tree , and , putting the rope round the unicorn ' s neck , he took the axe , set free the horn , and when all his party were assembled he led forth the animal and brought it to the king . the king did not yet wish to give him the promised reward , and set him a third task to do .
before the wedding could take place the tailor was to secure a wild boar which had done a great deal of damage in the wood .
the huntsmen were to accompany him .
" all right ," said the tailor , " this is child ' s play ."
but he did not take the huntsmen into the wood , and they were all the better pleased , for the wild boar had many a time before received them in such a way that they had no fancy to disturb him . when the boar caught sight of the tailor he ran at him with foaming mouth and gleaming tusks to bear him to the ground , but the nimble hero rushed into a chapel which chanced to be near , and jumped quickly out of a window on the other side .
the boar ran after him , and when he got inside the door shut after him , and there he was imprisoned , for the creature was too big and unwieldy to jump out of the window too .
then the little tailor called the huntsmen that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes ; and then he betook himself to the king , who now , whether he liked it or not , was obliged to fulfil his promise , and give him his daughter and the half of his kingdom .
but if he had known that the great warrior was only a little tailor he would have taken it still more to heart .
so the wedding was celebrated with great splendour and little joy , and the tailor was made into a king . one night the young queen heard her husband talking in his sleep and saying , " now boy , make me that waistcoat and patch me those breeches , or i will lay my yard measure about your shoulders !"
and so , as she perceived of what low birth her husband was , she went to her father the next morning and told him all , and begged him to set her free from a man who was nothing better than a tailor .
the king bade her be comforted , saying , " to - night leave your bedroom door open , my guard shall stand outside , and when he is asleep they shall come in and bind him and carry him off to a ship , and he shall be sent to the other side of the world ."
so the wife felt consoled , but the king ' s water - bearer , who had been listening all the while , went to the little tailor and disclosed to him the whole plan .
" i shall put a stop to all this ," said he . at night he lay down as usual in bed , and when his wife thought that he was asleep , she got up , opened the door and lay down again .
the little tailor , who only made believe to be asleep , began to murmur plainly , " now , boy , make me that waistcoat and patch me those breeches , or i will lay my yard measure about your shoulders !
i have slain seven at one blow , killed two giants , caught a unicorn , and taken a wild boar , and shall i be afraid of those who are standing outside my room door ?"
and when they heard the tailor say this , a great fear seized them ; they fled away as if they had been wild hares , and none of them would venture to attack him .
and so the little tailor all his lifetime remained a king .
