a soldier came marching along the high road : " left , right - left , right ."
he had his knapsack on his back , and a sword at his side ; he had been to the wars , and was now returning home .
as he walked on , he met a very frightful - looking old witch in the road .
her under - lip hung quite down on her breast , and she stopped and said , " good evening , soldier ; you have a very fine sword , and a large knapsack , and you are a real soldier ; so you shall have as much money as ever you like .
"" thank you , old witch ," said the soldier .
" do you see that large tree ," said the witch , pointing to a tree which stood beside them .
" well , it is quite hollow inside , and you must climb to the top , when you will see a hole , through which you can let yourself down into the tree to a great depth .
i will tie a rope round your body , so that i can pull you up again when you call out to me .
"" but what am i to do , down there in the tree ?"
asked the soldier .
" get money ," she replied ; " for you must know that when you reach the ground under the tree , you will find yourself in a large hall , lighted up by three hundred lamps ; you will then see three doors , which can be easily opened , for the keys are in all the locks .
on entering the first of the chambers , to which these doors lead , you will see a large chest , standing in the middle of the floor , and upon it a dog seated , with a pair of eyes as large as teacups .
but you need not be at all afraid of him ; i will give you my blue checked apron , which you must spread upon the floor , and then boldly seize hold of the dog , and place him upon it .
you can then open the chest , and take from it as many pence as you please , they are only copper pence ; but if you would rather have silver money , you must go into the second chamber .
here you will find another dog , with eyes as big as mill - wheels ; but do not let that trouble you .
place him upon my apron , and then take what money you please .
if , however , you like gold best , enter the third chamber , where there is another chest full of it .
the dog who sits on this chest is very dreadful ; his eyes are as big as a tower , but do not mind him .
if he also is placed upon my apron , he cannot hurt you , and you may take from the chest what gold you will .
"" this is not a bad story ," said the soldier ; " but what am i to give you , you old witch ?
for , of course , you do not mean to tell me all this for nothing .
"" no ," said the witch ; " but i do not ask for a single penny .
only promise to bring me an old tinder - box , which my grandmother left behind the last time she went down there .
"" very well ; i promise .
now tie the rope round my body .
"" here it is ," replied the witch ; " and here is my blue checked apron .
" as soon as the rope was tied , the soldier climbed up the tree , and let himself down through the hollow to the ground beneath ; and here he found , as the witch had told him , a large hall , in which many hundred lamps were all burning . then he opened the first door .
" ah !"
there sat the dog , with the eyes as large as teacups , staring at him .
" you ' re a pretty fellow ," said the soldier , seizing him , and placing him on the witch ' s apron , while he filled his pockets from the chest with as many pieces as they would hold .
then he closed the lid , seated the dog upon it again , and walked into another chamber , and , sure enough , there sat the dog with eyes as big as mill - wheels .
" you had better not look at me in that way ," said the soldier ; " you will make your eyes water ;" and then he seated him also upon the apron , and opened the chest .
but when he saw what a quantity of silver money it contained , he very quickly threw away all the coppers he had taken , and filled his pockets and his knapsack with nothing but silver .
then he went into the third room , and there the dog was really hideous ; his eyes were , truly , as big as towers , and they turned round and round in his head like wheels .
" good morning ," said the soldier , touching his cap , for he had never seen such a dog in his life .
but after looking at him more closely , he thought he had been civil enough , so he placed him on the floor , and opened the chest .
good gracious , what a quantity of gold there was !
enough to buy all the sugar - sticks of the sweet - stuff women ; all the tin soldiers , whips , and rocking - horses in the world , or even the whole town itself there was , indeed , an immense quantity .
so the soldier now threw away all the silver money he had taken , and filled his pockets and his knapsack with gold instead ; and not only his pockets and his knapsack , but even his cap and boots , so that he could scarcely walk .
he was really rich now ; so he replaced the dog on the chest , closed the door , and called up through the tree : " now pull me out , you old witch .
"" have you got the tinder - box ?"
asked the witch .
" no ; i declare i quite forgot it ."
so he went back and fetched the tinderbox , and then the witch drew him up out of the tree , and he stood again in the high road , with his pockets , his knapsack , his cap , and his boots full of gold .
" what are you going to do with the tinder - box ?"
asked the soldier .
" that is nothing to you ," replied the witch ; " you have the money , now give me the tinder - box .
"" i tell you what ," said the soldier , " if you don ' t tell me what you are going to do with it , i will draw my sword and cut off your head .
"" no ," said the witch . the soldier immediately cut off her head , and there she lay on the ground .
then he tied up all his money in her apron , and slung it on his back like a bundle , put the tinderbox in his pocket , and walked off to the nearest town . it was a very nice town , and he put up at the best inn , and ordered a dinner of all his favourite dishes , for now he was rich and had plenty of money . the servant , who cleaned his boots , thought they certainly were a shabby pair to be worn by such a rich gentleman , for he had not yet bought any new ones .
the next day , however , he procured some good clothes and proper boots , so that our soldier soon became known as a fine gentleman , and the people visited him , and told him all the wonders that were to be seen in the town , and of the king ' s beautiful daughter , the princess .
" where can i see her ?"
asked the soldier .
" she is not to be seen at all ," they said ; " she lives in a large copper castle , surrounded by walls and towers .
no one but the king himself can pass in or out , for there has been a prophecy that she will marry a common soldier , and the king cannot bear to think of such a marriage .
"" i should like very much to see her ," thought the soldier ; but he could not obtain permission to do so . however , he passed a very pleasant time ; went to the theatre , drove in the king ' s garden , and gave a great deal of money to the poor , which was very good of him ; he remembered what it had been in olden times to be without a shilling .
now he was rich , had fine clothes , and many friends , who all declared he was a fine fellow and a real gentleman , and all this gratified him exceedingly .
but his money would not last forever ; and as he spent and gave away a great deal daily , and received none , he found himself at last with only two shillings left .
so he was obliged to leave his elegant rooms , and live in a little garret under the roof , where he had to clean his own boots , and even mend them with a large needle .
none of his friends came to see him , there were too many stairs to mount up . one dark evening , he had not even a penny to buy a candle ; then all at once he remembered that there was a piece of candle stuck in the tinder - box , which he had brought from the old tree , into which the witch had helped him .
he found the tinder - box , but no sooner had he struck a few sparks from the flint and steel , than the door flew open and the dog with eyes as big as teacups , whom he had seen while down in the tree , stood before him , and said , " what orders , master ?
"" hallo ," said the soldier ; " well this is a pleasant tinderbox , if it brings me all i wish for ."
- " bring me some money ," said he to the dog .
he was gone in a moment , and presently returned , carrying a large bag of coppers in his month . the soldier very soon discovered after this the value of the tinder - box .
if he struck the flint once , the dog who sat on the chest of copper money made his appearance ; if twice , the dog came from the chest of silver ; and if three times , the dog with eyes like towers , who watched over the gold .
the soldier had now plenty of money ; he returned to his elegant rooms , and reappeared in his fine clothes , so that his friends knew him again directly , and made as much of him as before . after a while he began to think it was very strange that no one could get a look at the princess .
" every one says she is very beautiful ," thought he to himself ; " but what is the use of that if she is to be shut up in a copper castle surrounded by so many towers .
can i by any means get to see her .
stop !
where is my tinder - box ?"
then he struck a light , and in a moment the dog , with eyes as big as teacups , stood before him .
" it is midnight ," said the soldier , " yet i should very much like to see the princess , if only for a moment .
" the dog disappeared instantly , and before the soldier could even look round , he returned with the princess .
she was lying on the dog ' s back asleep , and looked so lovely , that every one who saw her would know she was a real princess .
the soldier could not help kissing her , true soldier as he was . then the dog ran back with the princess ; but in the morning , while at breakfast with the king and queen , she told them what a singular dream she had had during the night , of a dog and a soldier , that she had ridden on the dog ' s back , and been kissed by the soldier .
" that is a very pretty story , indeed ," said the queen . so the next night one of the old ladies of the court was set to watch by the princess ' s bed , to discover whether it really was a dream , or what else it might be . the soldier longed very much to see the princess once more , so he sent for the dog again in the night to fetch her , and to run with her as fast as ever he could .
but the old lady put on water boots , and ran after him as quickly as he did , and found that he carried the princess into a large house .
she thought it would help her to remember the place if she made a large cross on the door with a piece of chalk .
then she went home to bed , and the dog presently returned with the princess .
but when he saw that a cross had been made on the door of the house , where the soldier lived , he took another piece of chalk and made crosses on all the doors in the town , so that the lady - in - waiting might not be able to find out the right door . early the next morning the king and queen accompanied the lady and all the officers of the household , to see where the princess had been .
" here it is ," said the king , when they came to the first door with a cross on it .
" no , my dear husband , it must be that one ," said the queen , pointing to a second door having a cross also .
" and here is one , and there is another !"
they all exclaimed ; for there were crosses on all the doors in every direction .
so they felt it would be useless to search any farther . but the queen was a very clever woman ; she could do a great deal more than merely ride in a carriage .
she took her large gold scissors , cut a piece of silk into squares , and made a neat little bag .
this bag she filled with buckwheat flour , and tied it round the princess ' s neck ; and then she cut a small hole in the bag , so that the flour might be scattered on the ground as the princess went along . during the night , the dog came again and carried the princess on his back , and ran with her to the soldier , who loved her very much , and wished that he had been a prince , so that he might have her for a wife . the dog did not observe how the flour ran out of the bag all the way from the castle wall to the soldier ' s house , and even up to the window , where he had climbed with the princess .
therefore in the morning the king and queen found out where their daughter had been , and the soldier was taken up and put in prison . oh , how dark and disagreeable it was as he sat there , and the people said to him , " to - morrow you will be hanged ."
it was not very pleasant news , and besides , he had left the tinder - box at the inn .
in the morning he could see through the iron grating of the little window how the people were hastening out of the town to see him hanged ; he heard the drums beating , and saw the soldiers marching .
every one ran out to look at them , and a shoemaker ' s boy , with a leather apron and slippers on , galloped by so fast , that one of his slippers flew off and struck against the wall where the soldier sat looking through the iron grating .
" hallo , you shoemaker ' s boy , you need not be in such a hurry ," cried the soldier to him .
" there will be nothing to see till i come ; but if you will run to the house where i have been living , and bring me my tinder - box , you shall have four shillings , but you must put your best foot foremost ."
the shoemaker ' s boy liked the idea of getting the four shillings , so he ran very fast and fetched the tinder - box , and gave it to the soldier .
and now we shall see what happened . outside the town a large gibbet had been erected , round which stood the soldiers and several thousands of people .
the king and the queen sat on splendid thrones opposite to the judges and the whole council . the soldier already stood on the ladder ; but as they were about to place the rope around his neck , he said that an innocent request was often granted to a poor criminal before he suffered death .
he wished very much to smoke a pipe , as it would be the last pipe he should ever smoke in the world . the king could not refuse this request , so the soldier took his tinder - box , and struck fire , once , twice , thrice , and there in a moment stood all the dogs ; the one with eyes as big as teacups , the one with eyes as large as mill - wheels , and the third , whose eyes were like towers .
" help me now , that i may not be hanged ," cried the soldier .
and the dogs fell upon the judges and all the councillors ; seized one by the legs , and another by the nose , and tossed them many feet high in the air , so that they fell down and were dashed to pieces .
" i will not be touched ," said the king .
but the largest dog seized him , as well as the queen , and threw them after the others .
then the soldiers and all the people were afraid , and cried , " good soldier , you shall be our king , and you shall marry the beautiful princess .
" so they placed the soldier in the king ' s carriage , and the three dogs ran on in front and cried " hurrah !"
and the little boys whistled through their fingers , and the soldiers presented arms .
the princess came out of the copper castle , and became queen , which was very pleasing to her .
the wedding festivities lasted a whole week , and the dogs sat at the table , and stared with all their eyes .
