in a village there once lived two men who had the same name .
they were both called claus .
one of them had four horses , but the other had only one ; so to distinguish them , people called the owner of the four horses , " great claus ," and he who had only one , " little claus ."
now we shall hear what happened to them , for this is a true story . through the whole week , little claus was obliged to plough for great claus , and lend him his one horse ; and once a week , on a sunday , great claus lent him all his four horses .
then how little claus would smack his whip over all five horses , they were as good as his own on that one day .
the sun shone brightly , and the church bells were ringing merrily as the people passed by , dressed in their best clothes , with their prayer - books under their arms .
they were going to hear the clergyman preach .
they looked at little claus ploughing with his five horses , and he was so proud that he smacked his whip , and said , " gee - up , my five horses .
"" you must not say that ," said big claus ; " for only one of them belongs to you .
" but little claus soon forgot what he ought to say , and when any one passed he would call out , " gee - up , my five horses !
"" now i must beg you not to say that again ," said big claus ; " for if you do , i shall hit your horse on the head , so that he will drop dead on the spot , and there will be an end of him .
"" i promise you i will not say it any more ," said the other ; but as soon as people came by , nodding to him , and wishing him " good day ," he became so pleased , and thought how grand it looked to have five horses ploughing in his field , that he cried out again , " gee - up , all my horses !
"" i ' ll gee - up your horses for you ," said big claus ; and seizing a hammer , he struck the one horse of little claus on the head , and he fell dead instantly .
" oh , now i have no horse at all ," said little claus , weeping .
but after a while he took off the dead horse ' s skin , and hung the hide to dry in the wind .
then he put the dry skin into a bag , and , placing it over his shoulder , went out into the next town to sell the horse ' s skin . he had a very long way to go , and had to pass through a dark , gloomy forest .
presently a storm arose , and he lost his way , and before he discovered the right path , evening came on , and it was still a long way to the town , and too far to return home before night . near the road stood a large farmhouse .
the shutters outside the windows were closed , but lights shone through the crevices at the top .
" i might get permission to stay here for the night ," thought little claus ; so he went up to the door and knocked . the farmer ' s wife opened the door ; but when she heard what he wanted , she told him to go away , as her husband would not allow her to admit strangers .
" then i shall be obliged to lie out here ," said little claus to himself , as the farmer ' s wife shut the door in his face . near to the farmhouse stood a large haystack , and between it and the house was a small shed , with a thatched roof .
" i can lie up there ," said little claus , as he saw the roof ; " it will make a famous bed , but i hope the stork will not fly down and bite my legs ;" for on it stood a living stork , whose nest was in the roof . so little claus climbed to the roof of the shed , and while he turned himself to get comfortable , he discovered that the wooden shutters , which were closed , did not reach to the tops of the windows of the farmhouse , so that he could see into a room , in which a large table was laid out with wine , roast meat , and a splendid fish .
the farmer ' s wife and the sexton were sitting at the table together ; and she filled his glass , and helped him plenteously to fish , which appeared to be his favorite dish .
" if i could only get some , too ," thought little claus ; and then , as he stretched his neck towards the window he spied a large , beautiful pie ,– indeed they had a glorious feast before them . at this moment he heard some one riding down the road , towards the farmhouse .
it was the farmer returning home . he was a good man , but still he had a very strange prejudice ,– he could not bear the sight of a sexton .
if one appeared before him , he would put himself in a terrible rage .
in consequence of this dislike , the sexton had gone to visit the farmer ' s wife during her husband ' s absence from home , and the good woman had placed before him the best she had in the house to eat .
when she heard the farmer coming she was frightened , and begged the sexton to hide himself in a large empty chest that stood in the room .
he did so , for he knew her husband could not endure the sight of a sexton .
the woman then quickly put away the wine , and hid all the rest of the nice things in the oven ; for if her husband had seen them he would have asked what they were brought out for .
" oh , dear ," sighed little claus from the top of the shed , as he saw all the good things disappear .
" is any one up there ?"
asked the farmer , looking up and discovering little claus .
" why are you lying up there ?
come down , and come into the house with me .
" so little claus came down and told the farmer how he had lost his way and begged for a night ' s lodging .
" all right ," said the farmer ; " but we must have something to eat first .
" the woman received them both very kindly , laid the cloth on a large table , and placed before them a dish of porridge .
the farmer was very hungry , and ate his porridge with a good appetite , but little claus could not help thinking of the nice roast meat , fish and pies , which he knew were in the oven . under the table , at his feet , lay the sack containing the horse ' s skin , which he intended to sell at the next town .
now little claus did not relish the porridge at all , so he trod with his foot on the sack under the table , and the dry skin squeaked quite loud ." hush !"
said little claus to his sack , at the same time treading upon it again , till it squeaked louder than before ." hallo !
what have you got in your sack !"
asked the farmer .
" oh , it is a conjuror ," said little claus ; " and he says we need not eat porridge , for he has conjured the oven full of roast meat , fish , and pie ."" wonderful !"
cried the farmer , starting up and opening the oven door ; and there lay all the nice things hidden by the farmer ' s wife , but which he supposed had been conjured there by the wizard under the table .
the woman dared not say anything ; so she placed the things before them , and they both ate of the fish , the meat , and the pastry .
then little claus trod again upon his sack , and it squeaked as before .
" what does he say now ?"
asked the farmer .
" he says ," replied little claus , " that there are three bottles of wine for us , standing in the corner , by the oven ."
so the woman was obliged to bring out the wine also , which she had hidden , and the farmer drank it till he became quite merry .
he would have liked such a conjuror as little claus carried in his sack .
" could he conjure up the evil one ?"
asked the farmer .
" i should like to see him now , while i am so merry .
"" oh , yes !"
replied little claus , " my conjuror can do anything i ask him ,– can you not ?"
he asked , treading at the same time on the sack till it squeaked .
" do you hear ?
he answers ' yes ,' but he fears that we shall not like to look at him .
"" oh , i am not afraid .
what will he be like ?
"" well , he is very much like a sexton ."" ha !"
said the farmer , " then he must be ugly .
do you know i cannot endure the sight of a sexton .
however , that doesn ' t matter , i shall know who it is ; so i shall not mind .
now then , i have got up my courage , but don ' t let him come too near me .
"" stop , i must ask the conjuror ," said little claus ; so he trod on the bag , and stooped his ear down to listen .
" what does he say ?
"" he says that you must go and open that large chest which stands in the corner , and you will see the evil one crouching down inside ; but you must hold the lid firmly , that he may not slip out .
"" will you come and help me hold it ?"
said the farmer , going towards the chest in which his wife had hidden the sexton , who now lay inside , very much frightened . the farmer opened the lid a very little way , and peeped in .
" oh ," cried he , springing backwards , " i saw him , and he is exactly like our sexton .
how dreadful it is !
" so after that he was obliged to drink again , and they sat and drank till far into the night .
" you must sell your conjuror to me ," said the farmer ; " ask as much as you like , i will pay it ; indeed i would give you directly a whole bushel of gold .
"" no , indeed , i cannot ," said little claus ; " only think how much profit i could make out of this conjuror .
"" but i should like to have him ," said the fanner , still continuing his entreaties .
" well ," said little claus at length , " you have been so good as to give me a night ' s lodging , i will not refuse you ; you shall have the conjuror for a bushel of money , but i will have quite full measure .
"" so you shall ," said the farmer ; " but you must take away the chest as well .
i would not have it in the house another hour ; there is no knowing if he may not be still there .
" so little claus gave the farmer the sack containing the dried horse ' s skin , and received in exchange a bushel of money – full measure .
the farmer also gave him a wheelbarrow on which to carry away the chest and the gold .
" farewell ," said little claus , as he went off with his money and the great chest , in which the sexton lay still concealed . on one side of the forest was a broad , deep river , the water flowed so rapidly that very few were able to swim against the stream .
a new bridge had lately been built across it , and in the middle of this bridge little claus stopped , and said , loud enough to be heard by the sexton , " now what shall i do with this stupid chest ; it is as heavy as if it were full of stones : i shall be tired if i roll it any farther , so i may as well throw it in the river ; if it swims after me to my house , well and good , and if not , it will not much matter .
" so he seized the chest in his hand and lifted it up a little , as if he were going to throw it into the water .
" no , leave it alone ," cried the sexton from within the chest ; " let me out first .
"" oh ," exclaimed little claus , pretending to be frightened , " he is in there still , is he ?
i must throw him into the river , that he may be drowned .
"" oh , no ; oh , no ," cried the sexton ; " i will give you a whole bushel full of money if you will let me go .
"" why , that is another matter ," said little claus , opening the chest .
the sexton crept out , pushed the empty chest into the water , and went to his house , then he measured out a whole bushel full of gold for little claus , who had already received one from the farmer , so that now he had a barrow full .
" i have been well paid for my horse ," said he to himself when he reached home , entered his own room , and emptied all his money into a heap on the floor .
" how vexed great claus will be when he finds out how rich i have become all through my one horse ; but i shall not tell him exactly how it all happened .
" then he sent a boy to great claus to borrow a bushel measure .
" what can he want it for ?"
thought great claus ; so he smeared the bottom of the measure with tar , that some of whatever was put into it might stick there and remain .
and so it happened ; for when the measure returned , three new silver florins were sticking to it .
" what does this mean ?"
said great claus ; so he ran off directly to little claus , and asked , " where did you get so much money ?
"" oh , for my horse ' s skin , i sold it yesterday .
"" it was certainly well paid for then ," said great claus ; and he ran home to his house , seized a hatchet , and knocked all his four horses on the head , flayed off their skins , and took them to the town to sell .
" skins , skins , who ' ll buy skins ?"
he cried , as he went through the streets . all the shoemakers and tanners came running , and asked how much he wanted for them .
" a bushel of money , for each ," replied great claus .
" are you mad ?"
they all cried ; " do you think we have money to spend by the bushel ?
"" skins , skins ," he cried again , " who ' ll buy skins ?"
but to all who inquired the price , his answer was , " a bushel of money .
"" he is making fools of us ," said they all ; then the shoemakers took their straps , and the tanners their leather aprons , and began to beat great claus .
" skins , skins !"
they cried , mocking him ; " yes , we ' ll mark your skin for you , till it is black and blue ."
- " out of the town with him ," said they .
and great claus was obliged to run as fast as he could , he had never before been so thoroughly beaten .
" ah ," said he , as he came to his house ; " little claus shall pay me for this ; i will beat him to death .
" meanwhile the old grandmother of little claus died .
she had been cross , unkind , and really spiteful to him ; but he was very sorry , and took the dead woman and laid her in his warm bed to see if he could bring her to life again .
there he determined that she should lie the whole night , while he seated himself in a chair in a corner of the room as he had often done before . during the night , as he sat there , the door opened , and in came great claus with a hatchet .
he knew well where little claus ' s bed stood ; so he went right up to it , and struck the old grandmother on the head .
thinking it must be little claus .
" there ," cried he , " now you cannot make a fool of me again ;" and then he went home .
" that is a very wicked man ," thought little claus ; " he meant to kill me .
it is a good thing for my old grandmother that she was already dead , or he would have taken her life .
" then he dressed his old grandmother in her best clothes , borrowed a horse of his neighbor , and harnessed it to a cart .
then he placed the old woman on the back seat , so that she might not fall out as he drove , and rode away through the wood .
by sunrise they reached a large inn , where little claus stopped and went to get something to eat . the landlord was a rich man , and a good man too ; but as passionate as if he had been made of pepper and snuff .
" good morning ," said he to little claus ; " you are come betimes to - day .
"" yes ," said little claus ; " i am going to the town with my old grandmother ; she is sitting at the back of the wagon , but i cannot bring her into the room .
will you take her a glass of mead ?
but you must speak very loud , for she cannot hear well .
"" yes , certainly i will ," replied the landlord ; and , pouring out a glass of mead , he carried it out to the dead grandmother , who sat upright in the cart .
" here is a glass of mead from your grandson ," said the landlord .
the dead woman did not answer a word , but sat quite still .
" do you not hear ?"
cried the landlord as loud as he could ; " here is a glass of mead from your grandson .
" again and again he bawled it out , but as she did not stir he flew into a passion , and threw the glass of mead in her face ; it struck her on the nose , and she fell backwards out of the cart , for she was only seated there , not tied in ." hallo !"
cried little claus , rushing out of the door , and seizing hold of the landlord by the throat ; " you have killed my grandmother ; see , here is a great hole in her forehead .
"" oh , how unfortunate ," said the landlord , wringing his hands .
" this all comes of my fiery temper .
dear little claus , i will give you a bushel of money ; i will bury your grandmother as if she were my own ; only keep silent , or else they will cut off my head , and that would be disagreeable .
" so it happened that little claus received another bushel of money , and the landlord buried his old grandmother as if she had been his own . when little claus reached home again , he immediately sent a boy to great claus , requesting him to lend him a bushel measure .
" how is this ?"
thought great claus ; " did i not kill him ?
i must go and see for myself ."
so he went to little claus , and took the bushel measure with him .
" how did you get all this money ?"
asked great claus , staring with wide open eyes at his neighbor ' s treasures .
" you killed my grandmother instead of me ," said little claus ; " so i have sold her for a bushel of money .
"" that is a good price at all events ," said great claus .
so he went home , took a hatchet , and killed his old grandmother with one blow .
then he placed her on a cart , and drove into the town to the apothecary , and asked him if he would buy a dead body .
" whose is it , and where did you get it ?"
asked the apothecary .
" it is my grandmother ," he replied ; " i killed her with a blow , that i might get a bushel of money for her .
"" heaven preserve us !"
cried the apothecary , " you are out of your mind .
don ' t say such things , or you will lose your head ."
and then he talked to him seriously about the wicked deed he had done , and told him that such a wicked man would surely be punished .
great claus got so frightened that he rushed out of the surgery , jumped into the cart , whipped up his horses , and drove home quickly .
the apothecary and all the people thought him mad , and let him drive where he liked .
" you shall pay for this ," said great claus , as soon as he got into the highroad , " that you shall , little claus ."
so as soon as he reached home he took the largest sack he could find and went over to little claus .
" you have played me another trick ," said he .
" first , i killed all my horses , and then my old grandmother , and it is all your fault ; but you shall not make a fool of me any more ."
so he laid hold of little claus round the body , and pushed him into the sack , which he took on his shoulders , saying , " now i ' m going to drown you in the river .
" he had a long way to go before he reached the river , and little claus was not a very light weight to carry .
the road led by the church , and as they passed he could hear the organ playing and the people singing beautifully .
great claus put down the sack close to the church - door , and thought he might as well go in and hear a psalm before he went any farther .
little claus could not possibly get out of the sack , and all the people were in church ; so in he went .
" oh dear , oh dear ," sighed little claus in the sack , as he turned and twisted about ; but he found he could not loosen the string with which it was tied .
presently an old cattle driver , with snowy hair , passed by , carrying a large staff in his hand , with which he drove a large herd of cows and oxen before him .
they stumbled against the sack in which lay little claus , and turned it over .
" oh dear ," sighed little claus , " i am very young , yet i am soon going to heaven .
"" and i , poor fellow ," said the drover , " i who am so old already , cannot get there .
"" open the sack ," cried little claus ; " creep into it instead of me , and you will soon be there .
"" with all my heart ," replied the drover , opening the sack , from which sprung little claus as quickly as possible .
" will you take care of my cattle ?"
said the old man , as he crept into the bag .
" yes ," said little claus , and he tied up the sack , and then walked off with all the cows and oxen . when great claus came out of church , he took up the sack , and placed it on his shoulders .
it appeared to have become lighter , for the old drover was not half so heavy as little claus .
" how light he seems now ," said he .
" ah , it is because i have been to a church ."
so he walked on to the river , which was deep and broad , and threw the sack containing the old drover into the water , believing it to be little claus .
" there you may lie !"
he exclaimed ; " you will play me no more tricks now .
" then he turned to go home , but when he came to a place where two roads crossed , there was little claus driving the cattle .
" how is this ?"
said great claus .
" did i not drown you just now ?
"" yes ," said little claus ; " you threw me into the river about half an hour ago .
"" but wherever did you get all these fine beasts ?"
asked great claus .
" these beasts are sea - cattle ," replied little claus .
" i ' ll tell you the whole story , and thank you for drowning me ; i am above you now , i am really very rich .
i was frightened , to be sure , while i lay tied up in the sack , and the wind whistled in my ears when you threw me into the river from the bridge , and i sank to the bottom immediately ; but i did not hurt myself , for i fell upon beautifully soft grass which grows down there ; and in a moment , the sack opened , and the sweetest little maiden came towards me .
she had snow - white robes , and a wreath of green leaves on her wet hair .
she took me by the hand , and said , ' so you are come , little claus , and here are some cattle for you to begin with .
about a mile farther on the road , there is another herd for you .'
then i saw that the river formed a great highway for the people who live in the sea .
they were walking and driving here and there from the sea to the land at the , spot where the river terminates .
the bed of the river was covered with the loveliest flowers and sweet fresh grass .
the fish swam past me as rapidly as the birds do here in the air .
how handsome all the people were , and what fine cattle were grazing on the hills and in the valleys !
"" but why did you come up again ," said great claus , " if it was all so beautiful down there ?
i should not have done so ?
"" well ," said little claus , " it was good policy on my part ; you heard me say just now that i was told by the sea - maiden to go a mile farther on the road , and i should find a whole herd of cattle .
by the road she meant the river , for she could not travel any other way ; but i knew the winding of the river , and how it bends , sometimes to the right and sometimes to the left , and it seemed a long way , so i chose a shorter one ; and , by coming up to the land , and then driving across the fields back again to the river , i shall save half a mile , and get all my cattle more quickly .
"" what a lucky fellow you are !"
exclaimed great claus .
" do you think i should get any sea - cattle if i went down to the bottom of the river ?
"" yes , i think so ," said little claus ; " but i cannot carry you there in a sack , you are too heavy .
however if you will go there first , and then creep into a sack , i will throw you in with the greatest pleasure .
"" thank you ," said great claus ; " but remember , if i do not get any sea - cattle down there i shall come up again and give you a good thrashing .
"" no , now , don ' t be too fierce about it !"
said little claus , as they walked on towards the river .
when they approached it , the cattle , who were very thirsty , saw the stream , and ran down to drink .
" see what a hurry they are in ," said little claus , " they are longing to get down again ,"" come , help me , make haste ," said great claus ; " or you ' ll get beaten ."
so he crept into a large sack , which had been lying across the back of one of the oxen .
" put in a stone ," said great claus , " or i may not sink .
"" oh , there ' s not much fear of that ," he replied ; still he put a large stone into the bag , and then tied it tightly , and gave it a push .
" plump !"
in went great claus , and immediately sank to the bottom of the river .
" i ' m afraid he will not find any cattle ," said little claus , and then he drove his own beasts homewards .
