there was once a king ' s son who was seized with a desire to travel about the world , and took no one with him but a faithful servant .
one day he came to a great forest , and when darkness overtook him he could find no shelter , and knew not where to pass the night .
then he saw a girl who was going towards a small house , and when he came nearer , he saw that the maiden was young and beautiful .
he spoke to her , and said , " dear child , can i and my servant find shelter for the night in the little house ?"
- " oh , yes ," said the girl in a sad voice , " that you certainly can , but i do not advise you to venture it .
do not go in ."
- " why not ?"
asked the king ' s son .
the maiden sighed and said , " my step - mother practises wicked arts ; she is ill - disposed toward strangers ."
then he saw very well that he had come to the house of a witch , but as it was dark , and he could not go farther , and also was not afraid , he entered .
the old woman was sitting in an armchair by the fire , and looked at the stranger with her red eyes .
" good evening ," growled she , and pretended to be quite friendly .
" take a seat and rest yourselves ."
she blew up the fire on which she was cooking something in a small pot .
the daughter warned the two to be prudent , to eat nothing , and drink nothing , for the old woman brewed evil drinks .
they slept quietly until early morning .
when they were making ready for their departure , and the king ' s son was already seated on his horse , the old woman said , " stop a moment , i will first hand you a parting draught ."
whilst she fetched it , the king ' s son rode away , and the servant who had to buckle his saddle tight , was the only one present when the wicked witch came with the drink .
" take that to your master ," said she .
but at that instant the glass broke and the poison spirted on the horse , and it was so strong that the animal immediately fell down dead .
the servant ran after his master and told him what had happened , but would not leave his saddle behind him , and ran back to fetch it .
when , however , he came to the dead horse a raven was already sitting on it devouring it .
" who knows whether we shall find anything better to - day ?"
said the servant ; so he killed the raven , and took it with him .
and now they journeyed onwards into the forest the whole day , but could not get out of it .
by nightfall they found an inn and entered it .
the servant gave the raven to the innkeeper to make ready for supper .
they had , however , stumbled on a den of murderers , and during the darkness twelve of these came , intending to kill the strangers and rob them .
before they set about this work , they sat down to supper , and the innkeeper and the witch sat down with them , and together they ate a dish of soup in which was cut up the flesh of the raven .
hardly , however , had they swallowed a couple of mouthfuls , before they all fell down dead , for the raven had communicated to them the poison from the horse - flesh .
there was no no one else left in the house but the innkeeper ' s daughter , who was honest , and had taken no part in their godless deeds .
she opened all doors to the stranger and showed him the heaped - up treasures .
but the king ' s son said she might keep everything , he would have none of it , and rode onwards with his servant . after they had traveled about for a long time , they came to a town in which was a beautiful but proud princess , who had caused it to be proclaimed that whosoever should set her a riddle which she could not guess , that man should be her husband ; but if she guessed it , his head must be cut off .
she had three days to guess it in , but was so clever that she always found the answer to the riddle given her , before the appointed time .
nine suitors had already perished in this manner , when the king ' s son arrived , and blinded by her great beauty , was willing to stake his life for it .
then he went to her and laid his riddle before her .
" what is this ?"
said he , " one slew none , and yet slew twelve ."
she did not know what that was , she thought and thought , but she could not find out , she opened her riddle - books , but it was not in them -- in short , her wisdom was at an end .
as she did not know how to help herself , she ordered her maid to creep into the lord ' s sleeping - chamber , and listen to his dreams , and thought that he would perhaps speak in his sleep and discover the riddle .
but the clever servant had placed himself in the bed instead of his master , and when the maid came there , he tore off from her the mantle in which she had wrapped herself , and chased her out with rods .
the second night the king ' s daughter sent her maid - in - waiting , who was to see if she could succeed better in listening , but the servant took her mantle also away from her , and hunted her out with rods .
now the master believed himself safe for the third night , and lay down in his own bed .
then came the princess herself , and she had put on a misty - grey mantle , and she seated herself near him .
and when she thought that he was asleep and dreaming , she spoke to him , and hoped that he would answer in his sleep , as many do , but he was awake , and understood and heard everything quite well .
then she asked , " one slew none , what is that ?"
he replied , " a raven , which ate of a dead and poisoned horse , and died of it ."
she inquired further , " and yet slew twelve , what is that ?"
he answered , " that means twelve murderers , who ate the raven and died of it .
" when she knew the answer to the riddle she wanted to steal away , but he held her mantle so fast that she was forced to leave it behind her .
next morning , the king ' s daughter announced that she had guessed the riddle , and sent for the twelve judges and expounded it before them .
but the youth begged for a hearing , and said , " she stole into my room in the night and questioned me , otherwise she could not have discovered it ."
the judges said , " bring us a proof of this ."
then were the three mantles brought thither by the servant , and when the judges saw the misty - grey one which the king ' s daughter usually wore , they said , " let the mantle be embroidered with gold and silver , and then it will be your wedding - mantle .
