a widow had two daughters ; one was pretty and industrious , the other was ugly and lazy .
and as the ugly one was her own daughter , she loved her much the best , and the pretty one was made to do all the work , and be the drudge of the house .
every day the poor girl had to sit by a well on the high road and spin until her fingers bled .
now it happened once that as the spindle was bloody , she dipped it into the well to wash it ; but it slipped out of her hand and fell in .
then she began to cry , and ran to her step - mother , and told her of her misfortune ; and her stepmother scolded her without mercy , and said in her rage : " as you have let the spindle fall in , you must go and fetch it out again !"
then the girl went back again to the well , not knowing what to do , and in the despair of her heart she jumped down into the well the same way the spindle had gone .
after that she knew nothing ; and when she came to herself she was in a beautiful meadow , and the sun was shining on the flowers that grew round her .
and she walked on through the meadow until she came to a baker ' s oven that was full of bread ; and the bread called out to her : " oh , take me out , take me out , or i shall burn ; i am baked enough already !"
then she drew near , and with the baker ' s peel she took out all the loaves one after the other .
and she went farther on till she came to a tree weighed down with apples , and it called out to her : " oh , shake me , shake me , we apples are all of us ripe !"
then she shook the tree until the apples fell like rain , and she shook until there were no more to fall ; and when she had gathered them together in a heap , she went on farther .
at last she came to a little house , and an old woman was peeping out of it , but she had such great teeth that the girl was terrified and about to run away , only the old woman called her back .
" what are you afraid of , my dear child ?
come and live with me , and if you do the house - work well and orderly , things shall go well with you .
you must take great pains to make my bed well , and shake it up thoroughly , so that the feathers fly about , and then in the world it snows , for i am mother hulda ."
as the old woman spoke so kindly , the girl took courage , consented , and went to her work .
she did everything to the old woman ' s satisfaction , and shook the bed with such a will that the feathers flew about like snow - flakes : and so she led a good life , had never a cross word , but boiled and roast meat every day .
when she had lived a long time with mother hulda , she began to feel sad , not knowing herself what ailed her ; at last she began to think she must be home - sick ; and although she was a thousand times better off than at home where she was , yet she had a great longing to go home .
at last she said to her mistress : " i am homesick , and although i am very well off here , i cannot stay any longer ; i must go back to my own home ."
mother hulda answered : " it pleases me well that you should wish to go home , and , as you have served me faithfully , i will undertake to send you there !"
she took her by the hand and led her to a large door standing open , and as she was passing through it there fell upon her a heavy shower of gold , and the gold hung all about her , so that she was covered with it .
" all this is yours , because you have been so industrious ," said mother hulda ; and , besides that , she returned to her her spindle , the very same that she had dropped in the well .
and then the door was shut again , and the girl found herself back again in the world , not far from her mother ' s house ; and as she passed through the yard the cock stood on the top of the well and cried :" cock - a - doodle doo ! our golden girl has come home too !"
then she went in to her mother , and as she had returned covered with gold she was well received . so the girl related all her history , and what had happened to her , and when the mother heard how she came to have such great riches she began to wish that her ugly and idle daughter might have the same good fortune .
so she sent her to sit by the well and spin ; and in order to make her spindle bloody she put her hand into the thorn hedge .
then she threw the spindle into the well , and jumped in herself .
she found herself , like her sister , in the beautiful meadow , and followed the same path , and when she came to the baker ' s oven , the bread cried out : " oh , take me out , take me out , or i shall burn ; i am quite done already !"
but the lazy - bones answered : " i have no desire to black my hands ," and went on farther .
soon she came to the apple - tree , who called out : " oh , shake me , shake me , we apples are all of us ripe !"
but she answered : " that is all very fine ; suppose one of you should fall on my head ," and went on farther .
when she came to mother hulda ' s house she did not feel afraid , as she knew beforehand of her great teeth , and entered into her service at once .
the first day she put her hand well to the work , and was industrious , and did everything mother hulda bade her , because of the gold she expected ; but the second day she began to be idle , and the third day still more so , so that she would not get up in the morning .
neither did she make mother hulda ' s bed as it ought to have been made , and did not shake it for the feathers to fly about .
so that mother hulda soon grew tired of her , and gave her warning , at which the lazy thing was well pleased , and thought that now the shower of gold was coming ; so mother hulda led her to the door , and as she stood in the doorway , instead of the shower of gold a great kettle full of pitch was emptied over her .
" that is the reward for your service ," said mother hulda , and shut the door .
so the lazy girl came home all covered with pitch , and the cock on the top of the well seeing her , cried :" cock - a - doodle doo ! our dirty girl has come home too !"
and the pitch remained sticking to her fast , and never , as long as she lived , could it be got off .
