there was once a man who had seven sons , and still he had no daughter , however much he wished for one .
at length his wife again gave him hope of a child , and when it came into the world it was a girl .
the joy was great , but the child was sickly and small , and had to be privately baptized on account of its weakness .
the father sent one of the boys in haste to the spring to fetch water for the baptism .
the other six went with him , and as each of them wanted to be first to fill it , the jug fell into the well .
there they stood and did not know what to do , and none of them dared to go home .
as they still did not return , the father grew impatient , and said , " they have certainly forgotten it for some game , the wicked boys !"
he became afraid that the girl would have to die without being baptized , and in his anger cried , " i wish the boys were all turned into ravens ."
hardly was the word spoken before he heard a whirring of wings over his head in the air , looked up and saw seven coal - black ravens flying away . the parents could not recall the curse , and however sad they were at the loss of their seven sons , they still to some extent comforted themselves with their dear little daughter , who soon grew strong and every day became more beautiful .
for a long time she did not know that she had had brothers , for her parents were careful not to mention them before her , but one day she accidentally heard some people saying of herself , " that the girl was certainly beautiful , but that in reality she was to blame for the misfortune which had befallen her seven brothers ."
then she was much troubled , and went to her father and mother and asked if it was true that she had had brothers , and what had become of them ?
the parents now dared keep the secret no longer , but said that what had befallen her brothers was the will of heaven , and that her birth had only been the innocent cause .
but the maiden took it to heart daily , and thought she must deliver her brothers .
she had no rest or peace until she set out secretly , and went forth into the wide world to trace out her brothers and set them free , let it cost what it might .
she took nothing with her but a little ring belonging to her parents as a keepsake , a loaf of bread against hunger , a little pitcher of water against thirst , and a little chair as a provision against weariness . and now she went continually onwards , far , far to the very end of the world .
then she came to the sun , but it was too hot and terrible , and devoured little children .
hastily she ran away , and ran to the moon , but it was far too cold , and also awful and malicious , and when it saw the child , it said , " i smell , i smell the flesh of men ."
on this she ran swiftly away , and came to the stars , which were kind and good to her , and each of them sat on its own particular little chair .
but the morning star arose , and gave her the drumstick of a chicken , and said , " if you thou hast not that drumstick thou canst not open the glass mountain , and in the glass mountain are thy brothers .
" the maiden took the drumstick , wrapped it carefully in a cloth , and went onwards again until she came to the glass mountain .
the door was shut , and she thought she would take out the drumstick ; but when she undid the cloth , it was empty , and she had lost the good star ' s present .
what was she now to do ?
she wished to rescue her brothers , and had no key to the glass mountain .
the good sister took a knife , cut off one of her little fingers , put it in the door , and succeeded in opening it .
when she had gone inside , a little dwarf came to meet her , who said , " my child , what are you looking for ?"
- " i am looking for my brothers , the seven ravens ," she replied .
the dwarf said , " the lord ravens are not at home , but if you will wait here until they come , step in ."
thereupon the little dwarf carried the ravens ' dinner in , on seven little plates , and in seven little glasses , and the little sister ate a morsel from each plate , and from each little glass she took a sip , but in the last little glass she dropped the ring which she had brought away with her . suddenly she heard a whirring of wings and a rushing through the air , and then the little dwarf said , " now the lord ravens are flying home ."
then they came , and wanted to eat and drink , and looked for their little plates and glasses .
then said one after the other , " who has eaten something from my plate ?
who has drunk out of my little glass ?
it was a human mouth ."
and when the seventh came to the bottom of the glass , the ring rolled against his mouth .
then he looked at it , and saw that it was a ring belonging to his father and mother , and said , " god grant that our sister may be here , and then we shall be free ."
when the maiden , who was standing behind the door watching , heard that wish , she came forth , and on this all the ravens were restored to their human form again .
and they embraced and kissed each other , and went joyfully home .
