once upon a time there was a sweet little girl .
everyone who saw her liked her , but most of all her grandmother , who did not know what to give the child next .
once she gave her a little cap made of red velvet .
because it suited her so well , and she wanted to wear it all the time , she came to be known as little red riding hood .
one day her mother said to her : " come little red riding hood .
here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine .
take them to your grandmother .
she is sick and weak , and they will do her well .
mind your manners and give her my greetings .
behave yourself on the way , and do not leave the path , or you might fall down and break the glass , and then there will be nothing for your sick grandmother .
" little red riding hood promised to obey her mother .
the grandmother lived out in the woods , a half hour from the village .
when little red riding hood entered the woods a wolf came up to her .
she did not know what a wicked animal he was , and was not afraid of him .
" good day to you , little red riding hood ."
- " thank you , wolf ."
- " where are you going so early , little red riding hood ?"
- " to grandmother ' s ."
- " and what are you carrying under your apron ?"
- " grandmother is sick and weak , and i am taking her some cake and wine .
we baked yesterday , and they should give her strength ."
- " little red riding hood , just where does your grandmother live ?"
- " her house is a good quarter hour from here in the woods , under the three large oak trees .
there ' s a hedge of hazel bushes there .
you must know the place ," said little red riding hood .
the wolf thought to himself : " now there is a tasty bite for me .
just how are you going to catch her ?"
then he said : " listen , little red riding hood , haven ' t you seen the beautiful flowers that are blossoming in the woods ?
why don ' t you go and take a look ?
and i don ' t believe you can hear how beautifully the birds are singing .
you are walking along as though you were on your way to school in the village .
it is very beautiful in the woods .
" little red riding hood opened her eyes and saw the sunlight breaking through the trees and how the ground was covered with beautiful flowers .
she thought : " if a take a bouquet to grandmother , she will be very pleased .
anyway , it is still early , and i ' ll be home on time ."
and she ran off into the woods looking for flowers .
each time she picked one she thought that she could see an even more beautiful one a little way off , and she ran after it , going further and further into the woods .
but the wolf ran straight to the grandmother ' s house and knocked on the door .
" who ' s there ?"
- " little red riding hood .
i ' m bringing you some cake and wine .
open the door for me ."
- " just press the latch ," called out the grandmother .
" i ' m too weak to get up ."
the wolf pressed the latch , and the door opened .
he stepped inside , went straight to the grandmother ' s bed , and ate her up .
then he took her clothes , put them on , and put her cap on his head .
he got into her bed and pulled the curtains shut . little red riding hood had run after flowers , and did not continue on her way to grandmother ' s until she had gathered all that she could carry .
when she arrived , she found , to her surprise , that the door was open .
she walked into the parlor , and everything looked so strange that she thought : " oh , my god , why am i so afraid ?
i usually like it at grandmother ' s ."
then she went to the bed and pulled back the curtains .
grandmother was lying there with her cap pulled down over her face and looking very strange .
" oh , grandmother , what big ears you have !"
- " all the better to hear you with ."
- " oh , grandmother , what big eyes you have !"
- " all the better to see you with ."
- " oh , grandmother , what big hands you have !"
- " all the better to grab you with !"
- " oh , grandmother , what a horribly big mouth you have !"
- " all the better to eat you with !"
and with that he jumped out of bed , jumped on top of poor little red riding hood , and ate her up . as soon as the wolf had finished this tasty bite , he climbed back into bed , fell asleep , and began to snore very loudly .
a huntsman was just passing by .
he thought it strange that the old woman was snoring so loudly , so he decided to take a look .
he stepped inside , and in the bed there lay the wolf that he had been hunting for such a long time .
" he has eaten the grandmother , but perhaps she still can be saved .
i won ' t shoot him ," thought the huntsman .
so he took a pair of scissors and cut open his belly .
he had cut only a few strokes when he saw the red cap shining through .
he cut a little more , and the girl jumped out and cried : " oh , i was so frightened !
it was so dark inside the wolf ' s body !"
and then the grandmother came out alive as well .
then little red riding hood fetched some large heavy stones .
they filled the wolf ' s body with them , and when he woke up and tried to run away , the stones were so heavy that he fell down dead . the three of them were happy .
the huntsman took the wolf ' s pelt .
the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine that little red riding hood had brought .
and little red riding hood thought to herself : " as long as i live , i will never leave the path and run off into the woods by myself if mother tells me not to .
" they also tell how little red riding hood was taking some baked things to her grandmother another time , when another wolf spoke to her and wanted her to leave the path .
but little red riding hood took care and went straight to grandmother ' s .
she told her that she had seen the wolf , and that he had wished her a good day , but had stared at her in a wicked manner .
" if we hadn ' t been on a public road , he would have eaten me up ," she said .
" come ," said the grandmother .
" let ' s lock the door , so he can ' t get in ."
soon afterward the wolf knocked on the door and called out : " open up , grandmother .
it ' s little red riding hood , and i ' m bringing you some baked things ."
they remained silent , and did not open the door .
the wicked one walked around the house several times , and finally jumped onto the roof .
he wanted to wait until little red riding hood went home that evening , then follow her and eat her up in the darkness .
but the grandmother saw what he was up to .
there was a large stone trough in front of the house .
" fetch a bucket , little red riding hood ," she said .
" yesterday i cooked some sausage .
carry the water that i boiled them with to the trough ."
little red riding hood carried water until the large , large trough was clear full .
the smell of sausage arose into the wolf ' s nose .
he sniffed and looked down , stretching his neck so long that he could no longer hold himself , and he began to slide .
he slid off the roof , fell into the trough , and drowned .
and little red riding hood returned home happily and safely .
