i will tell you a story that was told me when i was a little boy .
every time i thought of this story , it seemed to me more and more charming ; for it is with stories as it is with many people – they become better as they grow older . i have no doubt that you have been in the country , and seen a very old farmhouse , with a thatched roof , and mosses and small plants growing wild upon it .
there is a stork ' s nest on the ridge of the gable , for we cannot do without the stork .
the walls of the house are sloping , and the windows are low , and only one of the latter is made to open .
the baking - oven sticks out of the wall like a great knob .
an elder - tree hangs over the palings ; and beneath its branches , at the foot of the paling , is a pool of water , in which a few ducks are disporting themselves .
there is a yard - dog too , who barks at all corners .
just such a farmhouse as this stood in a country lane ; and in it dwelt an old couple , a peasant and his wife .
small as their possessions were , they had one article they could not do without , and that was a horse , which contrived to live upon the grass which it found by the side of the high road .
the old peasant rode into the town upon this horse , and his neighbors often borrowed it of him , and paid for the loan of it by rendering some service to the old couple .
after a time they thought it would be as well to sell the horse , or exchange it for something which might be more useful to them .
but what might this something be ?
" you ' ll know best , old man ," said the wife .
" it is fair - day to - day ; so ride into town , and get rid of the horse for money , or make a good exchange ; whichever you do will be right to me , so ride to the fair .
" and she fastened his neckerchief for him ; for she could do that better than he could , and she could also tie it very prettily in a double bow .
she also smoothed his hat round and round with the palm of her hand , and gave him a kiss .
then he rode away upon the horse that was to be sold or bartered for something else .
yes , the old man knew what he was about .
the sun shone with great heat , and not a cloud was to be seen in the sky .
the road was very dusty ; for a number of people , all going to the fair , were driving , riding , or walking upon it .
there was no shelter anywhere from the hot sunshine .
among the rest a man came trudging along , and driving a cow to the fair .
the cow was as beautiful a creature as any cow could be .
" she gives good milk , i am certain ," said the peasant to himself .
" that would be a very good exchange : the cow for the horse .
hallo there !
you with the cow ," he said .
" i tell you what ; i dare say a horse is of more value than a cow ; but i don ' t care for that ,– a cow will be more useful to me ; so , if you like , we ' ll exchange .
"" to be sure i will ," said the man . accordingly the exchange was made ; and as the matter was settled , the peasant might have turned back ; for he had done the business he came to do .
but , having made up his mind to go to the fair , he determined to do so , if only to have a look at it ; so on he went to the town with his cow .
leading the animal , he strode on sturdily , and , after a short time , overtook a man who was driving a sheep .
it was a good fat sheep , with a fine fleece on its back .
" i should like to have that fellow ," said the peasant to himself .
" there is plenty of grass for him by our palings , and in the winter we could keep him in the room with us .
perhaps it would be more profitable to have a sheep than a cow .
shall i exchange ?
" the man with the sheep was quite ready , and the bargain was quickly made .
and then our peasant continued his way on the high - road with his sheep .
soon after this , he overtook another man , who had come into the road from a field , and was carrying a large goose under his arm .
" what a heavy creature you have there !"
said the peasant ; " it has plenty of feathers and plenty of fat , and would look well tied to a string , or paddling in the water at our place .
that would be very useful to my old woman ; she could make all sorts of profits out of it .
how often she has said , ' if now we only had a goose !'
now here is an opportunity , and , if possible , i will get it for her .
shall we exchange ?
i will give you my sheep for your goose , and thanks into the bargain .
" the other had not the least objection , and accordingly the exchange was made , and our peasant became possessor of the goose .
by this time he had arrived very near the town .
the crowd on the high road had been gradually increasing , and there was quite a rush of men and cattle .
the cattle walked on the path and by the palings , and at the turnpike - gate they even walked into the toll - keeper ' s potato - field , where one fowl was strutting about with a string tied to its leg , for fear it should take fright at the crowd , and run away and get lost .
the tail - feathers of the fowl were very short , and it winked with both its eyes , and looked very cunning , as it said " cluck , cluck ."
what were the thoughts of the fowl as it said this i cannot tell you ; but directly our good man saw it , he thought , " why that ' s the finest fowl i ever saw in my life ; it ' s finer than our parson ' s brood hen , upon my word .
i should like to have that fowl .
fowls can always pick up a few grains that lie about , and almost keep themselves .
i think it would be a good exchange if i could get it for my goose .
shall we exchange ?"
he asked the toll - keeper .
" exchange ," repeated the man ; " well , it would not be a bad thing .
" and so they made an exchange ,– the toll - keeper at the turnpike - gate kept the goose , and the peasant carried off the fowl .
now he had really done a great deal of business on his way to the fair , and he was hot and tired .
he wanted something to eat , and a glass of ale to refresh himself ; so he turned his steps to an inn .
he was just about to enter when the ostler came out , and they met at the door .
the ostler was carrying a sack .
" what have you in that sack ?"
asked the peasant .
" rotten apples ," answered the ostler ; " a whole sackful of them .
they will do to feed the pigs with .
"" why that will be terrible waste ," he replied ; " i should like to take them home to my old woman .
last year the old apple - tree by the grass - plot only bore one apple , and we kept it in the cupboard till it was quite withered and rotten .
it was always property , my old woman said ; and here she would see a great deal of property – a whole sackful ; i should like to show them to her .
"" what will you give me for the sackful ?"
asked the ostler .
" what will i give ?
well , i will give you my fowl in exchange .
" so he gave up the fowl , and received the apples , which he carried into the inn parlor .
he leaned the sack carefully against the stove , and then went to the table .
but the stove was hot , and he had not thought of that .
many guests were present – horse dealers , cattle drovers , and two englishmen .
the englishmen were so rich that their pockets quite bulged out and seemed ready to burst ; and they could bet too , as you shall hear .
" hiss - s - s , hiss - s - s ." what could that be by the stove ?
the apples were beginning to roast .
" what is that ?"
asked one .
" why , do you know "– said our peasant .
and then he told them the whole story of the horse , which he had exchanged for a cow , and all the rest of it , down to the apples .
" well , your old woman will give it you well when you get home ," said one of the englishmen .
" won ' t there be a noise ?"" what !
give me what ?"
said the peasant .
" why , she will kiss me , and say , ' what the old man does is always right .
'"" let us lay a wager on it ," said the englishmen .
" we ' ll wager you a ton of coined gold , a hundred pounds to the hundred - weight .
"" no ; a bushel will be enough ," replied the peasant .
" i can only set a bushel of apples against it , and i ' ll throw myself and my old woman into the bargain ; that will pile up the measure , i fancy ."" done !
taken !"
and so the bet was made . then the landlord ' s coach came to the door , and the two englishmen and the peasant got in , and away they drove , and soon arrived and stopped at the peasant ' s hut .
" good evening , old woman ."
- " good evening , old man ."
- " i ' ve made the exchange .
"" ah , well , you understand what you ' re about ," said the woman .
then she embraced him , and paid no attention to the strangers , nor did she notice the sack .
" i got a cow in exchange for the horse .
"" thank heaven ," said she .
" now we shall have plenty of milk , and butter , and cheese on the table .
that was a capital exchange .
"" yes , but i changed the cow for a sheep .
"" ah , better still !"
cried the wife .
" you always think of everything ; we have just enough pasture for a sheep .
ewe ' s milk and cheese , woollen jackets and stockings !
the cow could not give all these , and her hair only falls off .
how you think of everything !
"" but i changed away the sheep for a goose .
"" then we shall have roast goose to eat this year .
you dear old man , you are always thinking of something to please me .
this is delightful .
we can let the goose walk about with a string tied to her leg , so she will be fatter still before we roast her .
"" but i gave away the goose for a fowl .
"" a fowl !
well , that was a good exchange ," replied the woman .
" the fowl will lay eggs and hatch them , and we shall have chickens ; we shall soon have a poultry - yard .
oh , this is just what i was wishing for .
"" yes , but i exchanged the fowl for a sack of shrivelled apples ."" what !
i really must give you a kiss for that !"
exclaimed the wife .
" my dear , good husband , now i ' ll tell you something .
do you know , almost as soon as you left me this morning , i began to think of what i could give you nice for supper this evening , and then i thought of fried eggs and bacon , with sweet herbs ; i had eggs and bacon , but i wanted the herbs ; so i went over to the schoolmaster ' s : i knew they had plenty of herbs , but the schoolmistress is very mean , although she can smile so sweetly .
i begged her to lend me a handful of herbs .
' lend !'
she exclaimed , ' i have nothing to lend ; nothing at all grows in our garden , not even a shrivelled apple ; i could not even lend you a shrivelled apple , my dear woman .'
but now i can lend her ten , or a whole sackful , which i ' m very glad of ; it makes me laugh to think about it ;" and then she gave him a hearty kiss .
" well , i like all this ," said both the englishmen ; " always going down the hill , and yet always merry ; it ' s worth the money to see it ."
so they paid a hundred - weight of gold to the peasant , who , whatever he did , was not scolded but kissed . yes , it always pays best when the wife sees and maintains that her husband knows best , and whatever he does is right . that is a story which i heard when i was a child ; and now you have heard it too , and know that " what the old man does is always right ."
