in a certain country there was once great lamentation over a wild boar that laid waste the farmer ' s fields , killed the cattle , and ripped up people ' s bodies with his tusks .
the king promised a large reward to anyone who would free the land from this plague ; but the beast was so big and strong that no one dared to go near the forest in which it lived .
at last the king gave notice that whosoever should capture or kill the wild boar should have his only daughter to wife . now there lived in the country two brothers , sons of a poor man , who declared themselves willing to undertake the hazardous enterprise ; the elder , who was crafty and shrewd , out of pride ; the younger , who was innocent and simple , from a kind heart .
the king said , " in order that you may be the more sure of finding the beast , you must go into the forest from opposite sides ."
so the elder went in on the west side , and the younger on the east .
when the younger had gone a short way , a little man stepped up to him .
he held in his hand a black spear and said , " i give you this spear because your heart is pure and good ; with this you can boldly attack the wild boar , and it will do you no harm ."
he thanked the little man , shouldered the spear , and went on fearlessly .
before long he saw the beast , which rushed at him ; but he held the spear towards it , and in its blind fury it ran so swiftly against it that its heart was cloven in twain .
then he took the monster on his back and went homewards with it to the king . as he came out at the other side of the wood , there stood at the entrance a house where people were making merry with wine and dancing .
his elder brother had gone in here , and , thinking that after all the boar would not run away from him , was going to drink until he felt brave .
but when he saw his young brother coming out of the wood laden with his booty , his envious , evil heart gave him no peace .
he called out to him , " come in , dear brother , rest and refresh yourself with a cup of wine ."
the youth , who suspected no evil , went in and told him about the good little man who had given him the spear wherewith he had slain the boar . the elder brother kept him there until the evening , and then they went away together , and when in the darkness they came to a bridge over a brook , the elder brother let the other go first ; and when he was half - way across he gave him such a blow from behind that he fell down dead .
he buried him beneath the bridge , took the boar , and carried it to the king , pretending that he had killed it ; whereupon he obtained the king ' s daughter in marriage .
and when his younger brother did not come back he said , " the boar must have killed him ," and every one believed it . but as nothing remains hidden from god , so this black deed also was to come to light .
years afterwards a shepherd was driving his herd across the bridge , and saw lying in the sand beneath , a snow - white little bone .
he thought that it would make a good mouth - piece , so he clambered down , picked it up , and cut out of it a mouth - piece for his horn .
but when he blew through it for the first time , to his great astonishment , the bone began of its own accord to sing :" ah , friend , thou blowest upon my bone ! long have i lain beside the water ; my brother slew me for the boar , and took for his wifethe king ' s young daughter ."
" what a wonderful horn !"
said the shepherd ; " it sings by itself ; i must take it to my lord the king ."
and when he came with it to the king the horn again began to sing its little song .
the king understood it all , and caused the ground below the bridge to be dug up , and then the whole skeleton of the murdered man came to light .
the wicked brother could not deny the deed , and was sewn up in a sack and drowned .
but the bones of the murdered man were laid to rest in a beautiful tomb in the churchyard .
