there was once a poor woman who gave birth to a little son ; and as he came into the world with a caul on , it was predicted that in his fourteenth year he would have the king ' s daughter for his wife . it happened that soon afterwards the king came into the village , and no one knew that he was the king , and when he asked the people what news there was , they answered , " a child has just been born with a caul on ; whatever any one so born undertakes turns out well .
it is prophesied , too , that in his fourteenth year he will have the king ' s daughter for his wife .
" the king , who had a bad heart , and was angry about the prophecy , went to the parents , and , seeming quite friendly , said , " you poor people , let me have your child , and i will take care of it ."
at first they refused , but when the stranger offered them a large amount of gold for it , and they thought , " it is a luck - child , and everything must turn out well for it ," they at last consented , and gave him the child . the king put it in a box and rode away with it until he came to a deep piece of water ; then he threw the box into it and thought , " i have freed my daughter from her unlooked - for suitor .
" the box , however , did not sink , but floated like a boat , and not a drop of water made its way into it .
and it floated to within two miles of the king ' s chief city , where there was a mill , and it came to a stand - still at the mill - dam .
a miller ' s boy , who by good luck was standing there , noticed it and pulled it out with a hook , thinking that he had found a great treasure , but when he opened it there lay a pretty boy inside , quite fresh and lively .
he took him to the miller and his wife , and as they had no children they were glad , and said , " god has given him to us ."
they took great care of the foundling , and he grew up in all goodness . it happened that once in a storm , the king went into the mill , and he asked the mill - folk if the tall youth was their son .
" no ," answered they , " he ' s a foundling .
fourteen years ago he floated down to the mill - dam in a box , and the mill - boy pulled him out of the water ."
then the king knew that it was none other than the luck - child which he had thrown into the water , and he said , " my good people , could not the youth take a letter to the queen ; i will give him two gold pieces as a reward ?"
- " just as the king commands ," answered they , and they told the boy to hold himself in readiness .
then the king wrote a letter to the queen , wherein he said , " as soon as the boy arrives with this letter , let him be killed and buried , and all must be done before i come home .
" the boy set out with this letter ; but he lost his way , and in the evening came to a large forest .
in the darkness he saw a small light ; he went towards it and reached a cottage .
when he went in , an old woman was sitting by the fire quite alone .
she started when she saw the boy , and said , " whence do you come , and whither are you going ?"
- " i come from the mill ," he answered , " and wish to go to the queen , to whom i am taking a letter ; but as i have lost my way in the forest i should like to stay here over night ."
- " you poor boy ," said the woman , " you have come into a den of thieves , and when they come home they will kill you ."
- " let them come ," said the boy , " i am not afraid ; but i am so tired that i cannot go any farther :" and he stretched himself upon a bench and fell asleep . soon afterwards the robbers came , and angrily asked what strange boy was lying there ?
" ah ," said the old woman , " it is an innocent child who has lost himself in the forest , and out of pity i have let him come in ; he has to take a letter to the queen ."
the robbers opened the letter and read it , and in it was written that the boy as soon as he arrived should be put to death .
then the hard - hearted robbers felt pity , and their leader tore up the letter and wrote another , saying , that as soon as the boy came , he should be married at once to the king ' s daughter .
then they let him lie quietly on the bench until the next morning , and when he awoke they gave him the letter , and showed him the right way . and the queen , when she had received the letter and read it , did as was written in it , and had a splendid wedding - feast prepared , and the king ' s daughter was married to the luck - child , and as the youth was handsome and agreeable she lived with him in joy and contentment . after some time the king returned to his palace and saw that the prophecy was fulfilled , and the luck - child married to his daughter .
" how has that come to pass ?"
said he ; " i gave quite another order in my letter ."
so the queen gave him the letter , and said that he might see for himself what was written in it .
the king read the letter and saw quite well that it had been exchanged for the other .
he asked the youth what had become of the letter entrusted to him , and why he had brought another instead of it .
" i know nothing about it ," answered he ; " it must have been changed in the night , when i slept in the forest .
" the king said in a passion , " you shall not have everything quite so much your own way ; whosoever marries my daughter must fetch me from hell three golden hairs from the head of the devil ; bring me what i want , and you shall keep my daughter ."
in this way the king hoped to be rid of him for ever .
but the luck - child answered , " i will fetch the golden hairs , i am not afraid of the devil .
" thereupon he took leave of them and began his journey .
the road led him to a large town , where the watchman by the gates asked him what his trade was , and what he knew .
" i know everything ," answered the luck - child .
" then you can do us a favour ," said the watchman , " if you will tell us why our market - fountain , which once flowed with wine has become dry , and no longer gives even water ?"
- " that you shall know ," answered he ; " only wait until i come back ."
then he went farther and came to another town , and there also the gatekeeper asked him what was his trade , and what he knew .
" i know everything ," answered he .
" then you can do us a favour and tell us why a tree in our town which once bore golden apples now does not even put forth leaves ?"
- " you shall know that ," answered he ; " only wait until i come back ."
then he went on and came to a wide river over which he must go .
the ferryman asked him what his trade was , and what he knew .
" i know everything ," answered he .
" then you can do me a favour ," said the ferryman , " and tell me why i must always be rowing backwards and forwards , and am never set free ?"
- " you shall know that ," answered he ; " only wait until i come back .
" when he had crossed the water he found the entrance to hell .
it was black and sooty within , and the devil was not at home , but his grandmother was sitting in a large arm - chair .
" what do you want ?"
said she to him , but she did not look so very wicked .
" i should like to have three golden hairs from the devil ' s head ," answered he , " else i cannot keep my wife ."
- " that is a good deal to ask for ," said she ; " if the devil comes home and finds you , it will cost you your life ; but as i pity you , i will see if i cannot help you ."
she changed him into an ant and said , " creep into the folds of my dress , you will be safe there ."
- " yes ," answered he , " so far , so good ; but there are three things besides that i want to know : why a fountain which once flowed with wine has become dry , and no longer gives even water ; why a tree which once bore golden apples does not even put forth leaves ; and why a ferry - man must always be going backwards and forwards , and is never set free ?"
- " those are difficult questions ," answered she , " but only be silent and quiet and pay attention to what the devil says when i pull out the three golden hairs .
" as the evening came on , the devil returned home .
no sooner had he entered than he noticed that the air was not pure .
" i smell man ' s flesh ," said he ; " all is not right here ."
then he pried into every corner , and searched , but could not find anything .
his grandmother scolded him .
" it has just been swept ," said she , " and everything put in order , and now you are upsetting it again ; you have always got man ' s flesh in your nose .
sit down and eat your supper ."
when he had eaten and drunk he was tired , and laid his head in his grandmother ' s lap , and before long he was fast asleep , snoring and breathing heavily .
then the old woman took hold of a golden hair , pulled it out , and laid it down near her .
" oh !"
cried the devil , " what are you doing ?
"" i have had a bad dream ," answered the grandmother , " so i seized hold of your hair ."
- " what did you dream then ?"
said the devil .
" i dreamed that a fountain in a market - place from which wine once flowed was dried up , and not even water would flow out of it ; what is the cause of it ?"
- " oh , ho !
if they did but know it ," answered the devil ; " there is a toad sitting under a stone in the well ; if they killed it , the wine would flow again .
" he went to sleep again and snored until the windows shook .
then she pulled the second hair out .
" ha !
what are you doing ?"
cried the devil angrily .
" do not take it ill ," said she , " i did it in a dream ."
- " what have you dreamt this time ?"
asked he .
" i dreamt that in a certain kingdom there stood an apple - tree which had once borne golden apples , but now would not even bear leaves .
what , think you , was the reason ?"" oh !
if they did but know ," answered the devil .
" a mouse is gnawing at the root ; if they killed this they would have golden apples again , but if it gnaws much longer the tree will wither altogether .
but leave me alone with your dreams : if you disturb me in my sleep again you will get a box on the ear ."
the grandmother spoke gently to him until he fell asleep again and snored .
then she took hold of the third golden hair and pulled it out .
the devil jumped up , roared out , and would have treated her ill if she had not quieted him once more and said , " who can help bad dreams ?
"" what was the dream , then ?"
asked he , and was quite curious .
" i dreamt of a ferry - man who complained that he must always ferry from one side to the other , and was never released .
what is the cause of it ?"
- " ah !
the fool ," answered the devil ; " when any one comes and wants to go across he must put the oar in his hand , and the other man will have to ferry and he will be free ."
as the grandmother had plucked out the three golden hairs , and the three questions were answered , she let the old serpent alone , and he slept until daybreak .
when the devil had gone out again the old woman took the ant out of the folds of her dress , and gave the luck - child his human shape again .
" there are the three golden hairs for you ," said she .
" what the devil said to your three questions , i suppose you heard ?"
- " yes ," answered he , " i heard , and will take care to remember ."
- " you have what you want ," said she , " and now you can go your way ."
he thanked the old woman for helping him in his need , and left hell well content that everything had turned out so fortunately .
when he came to the ferry - man he was expected to give the promised answer .
" ferry me across first ," said the luck - child , " and then i will tell you how you can be set free ," and when he reached the opposite shore he gave him the devil ' s advice : " next time any one comes , who wants to be ferried over , just put the oar in his hand .
" he went on and came to the town wherein stood the unfruitful tree , and there too the watchman wanted an answer .
so he told him what he had heard from the devil : " kill the mouse which is gnawing at its root , and it will again bear golden apples ."
then the watchman thanked him , and gave him as a reward two asses laden with gold , which followed him .
at last he came to the town whose well was dry .
he told the watchman what the devil had said : " a toad is in the well beneath a stone ; you must find it and kill it , and the well will again give wine in plenty ."
the watchman thanked him , and also gave him two asses laden with gold . at last the luck - child got home to his wife , who was heartily glad to see him again , and to hear how well he had prospered in everything .
to the king he took what he had asked for , the devil ' s three golden hairs , and when the king saw the four asses laden with gold he was quite content , and said , " now all the conditions are fulfilled , and you can keep my daughter .
but tell me , dear son - in - law , where did all that gold come from ?
this is tremendous wealth !"
- " i was rowed across a river ," answered he , " and got it there ; it lies on the shore instead of sand ."
- " can i too fetch some of it ?"
said the king ; and he was quite eager about it .
" as much as you like ," answered he .
" there is a ferry - man on the river ; let him ferry you over , and you can fill your sacks on the other side .
" the greedy king set out in all haste , and when he came to the river he beckoned to the ferry - man to put him across .
the ferry - man came and bade him get in , and when they got to the other shore he put the oar in his hand and sprang out .
but from this time forth the king had to ferry , as a punishment for his sins .
perhaps he is ferrying still ?
if he is , it is because no one has taken the oar from him .
