a louse and a flea kept house together and were brewing beer in an egg - shell .
then the little louse fell in and burnt herself .
on this the little flea began to scream loudly .
then said the little room - door : " little flea , why art thou screaming ?"
– " because the louse has burnt herself .
" then the little door began to creak .
on this a little broom in the corner said : " why art thou creaking , little door ?"
– " have i not reason to creak ? the little louse has burnt herself , the little flea is weeping .
" so the little broom began to sweep frantically .
then a little cart passed by and said : " why art thou sweeping , little broom ?"
– " have i not reason to sweep ? the little louse has burnt herself , the little flea is weeping , the little door is creaking .
" so the little cart said : " then i will run ," and began to run wildly .
then said the ash - heap by which it ran : " why art thou running so , little cart ?"
– " have i not reason to run ? the little louse has burnt herself , the little flea is weeping , the little door is creaking , the little broom is sweeping .
" the ash - heap said : " then i will burn furiously ," and began to burn in clear flames .
a little tree stood near the ash - heap and said : " ash - heap , why art thou burning ?"
– " have i not reason to burn ? the little louse has burnt herself , the little flea is weeping , the little door is creaking , the little broom is sweeping , the little cart is running .
" the little tree said : " then i will shake myself ," and began to shake herself so that all her leaves fell off ; a girl who came up with her water - pitcher saw that , and said : " little tree , why art thou shaking thyself ?"
– " have i not reason to shake myself ? the little louse has burnt herself , the little flea is weeping , the little door is creaking , the little broom is sweeping , the little cart is running , the little ash - heap is burning .
" on this the girl said : " then i will break my little water - pitcher ," and she broke her little water - pitcher .
then said the little spring from which ran the water : " girl , why art thou breaking thy water - jug ?"
– " have i not reason to break my water - jug ? the little louse has burnt herself , the little flea is weeping , the little door is creaking , the little broom is sweeping , the little cart is running , the little ash - heap is burning , the little tree is shaking itself .
"" oh , ho ," said the spring , " then i will begin to flow ," and began to flow violently .
and in the water everything was drowned , the girl , the little tree , the little ash - heap , the little cart , the broom , the little door , the little flea , the little louse , all together .
