a certain miller had little by little fallen into poverty , and had nothing left but his mill and a large apple - tree behind it .
once when he had gone into the forest to fetch wood , an old man stepped up to him whom he had never seen before , and said , " why dost thou plague thyself with cutting wood , i will make thee rich , if thou wilt promise me what is standing behind thy mill ?"
- " what can that be but my apple - tree ?"
thought the miller , and said , " yes ," and gave a written promise to the stranger .
he , however , laughed mockingly and said , " when three years have passed , i will come and carry away what belongs to me ," and then he went .
when the miller got home , his wife came to meet him and said , " tell me , miller , from whence comes this sudden wealth into our house ?
all at once every box and chest was filled ; no one brought it in , and i know not how it happened ."
he answered , " it comes from a stranger who met me in the forest , and promised me great treasure .
i , in return , have promised him what stands behind the mill ; we can very well give him the big apple - tree for it ."
- " ah , husband ," said the terrified wife , " that must have been the devil !
he did not mean the apple - tree , but our daughter , who was standing behind the mill sweeping the yard .
" the miller ' s daughter was a beautiful , pious girl , and lived through the three years in the fear of god and without sin .
when therefore the time was over , and the day came when the evil - one was to fetch her , she washed herself clean , and made a circle round herself with chalk .
the devil appeared quite early , but he could not come near to her .
angrily , he said to the miller , " take all water away from her , that she may no longer be able to wash herself , for otherwise i have no power over her ."
the miller was afraid , and did so .
the next morning the devil came again , but she had wept on her hands , and they were quite clean .
again he could not get near her , and furiously said to the miller , " cut her hands off , or else i cannot get the better of her ."
the miller was shocked and answered , " how could i cut off my own child ' s hands ?"
then the evil - one threatened him and said , " if thou dost not do it thou art mine , and i will take thee thyself ."
the father became alarmed , and promised to obey him .
so he went to the girl and said , " my child , if i do not cut off both thine hands , the devil will carry me away , and in my terror i have promised to do it .
help me in my need , and forgive me the harm i do thee ."
she replied , " dear father , do with me what you will , i am your child ."
thereupon she laid down both her hands , and let them be cut off .
the devil came for the third time , but she had wept so long and so much on the stumps , that after all they were quite clean .
then he had to give in , and had lost all right over her . the miller said to her , " i have by means of thee received such great wealth that i will keep thee most delicately as long as thou livest ."
but she replied , " here i cannot stay , i will go forth , compassionate people will give me as much as i require ."
thereupon she caused her maimed arms to be bound to her back , and by sunrise she set out on her way , and walked the whole day until night fell .
then she came to a royal garden , and by the shimmering of the moon she saw that trees covered with beautiful fruits grew in it , but she could not enter , for there was much water round about it .
and as she had walked the whole day and not eaten one mouthful , and hunger tormented her , she thought , " ah , if i were but inside , that i might eat of the fruit , else must i die of hunger !"
then she knelt down , called on god the lord , and prayed .
and suddenly an angel came towards her , who made a dam in the water , so that the moat became dry and she could walk through it .
and now she went into the garden and the angel went with her .
she saw a tree covered with beautiful pears , but they were all counted .
then she went to them , and to still her hunger , ate one with her mouth from the tree , but no more .
the gardener was watching ; but as the angel was standing by , he was afraid and thought the maiden was a spirit , and was silent , neither did he dare to cry out , or to speak to the spirit .
when she had eaten the pear , she was satisfied , and went and concealed herself among the bushes .
the king to whom the garden belonged , came down to it next morning , and counted , and saw that one of the pears was missing , and asked the gardener what had become of it , as it was not lying beneath the tree , but was gone .
then answered the gardener , " last night , a spirit came in , who had no hands , and ate off one of the pears with its mouth ."
the king said , " how did the spirit get over the water , and where did it go after it had eaten the pear ?"
the gardener answered , " some one came in a snow - white garment from heaven who made a dam , and kept back the water , that the spirit might walk through the moat .
and as it must have been an angel , i was afraid , and asked no questions , and did not cry out .
when the spirit had eaten the pear , it went back again ."
the king said , " if it be as thou sayest , i will watch with thee to - night .
" when it grew dark the king came into the garden and brought a priest with him , who was to speak to the spirit .
all three seated themselves beneath the tree and watched .
at midnight the maiden came creeping out of the thicket , went to the tree , and again ate one pear off it with her mouth , and beside her stood the angel in white garments .
then the priest went out to them and said , " comest thou from heaven or from earth ?
art thou a spirit , or a human being ?"
she replied , " i am no spirit , but an unhappy mortal deserted by all but god ."
the king said , " if thou art forsaken by all the world , yet will i not forsake thee ."
he took her with him into his royal palace , and as she was so beautiful and good , he loved her with all his heart , had silver hands made for her , and took her to wife . after a year the king had to take the field , so he commended his young queen to the care of his mother and said , " if she is brought to bed take care of her , nurse her well , and tell me of it at once in a letter ."
then she gave birth to a fine boy .
so the old mother made haste to write and announce the joyful news to him .
but the messenger rested by a brook on the way , and as he was fatigued by the great distance , he fell asleep .
then came the devil , who was always seeking to injure the good queen , and exchanged the letter for another , in which was written that the queen had brought a monster into the world .
when the king read the letter he was shocked and much troubled , but he wrote in answer that they were to take great care of the queen and nurse her well until his arrival .
the messenger went back with the letter , but rested at the same place and again fell asleep .
then came the devil once more , and put a different letter in his pocket , in which it was written that they were to put the queen and her child to death .
the old mother was terribly shocked when she received the letter , and could not believe it .
she wrote back again to the king , but received no other answer , because each time the devil substituted a false letter , and in the last letter it was also written that she was to preserve the queen ' s tongue and eyes as a token that she had obeyed . but the old mother wept to think such innocent blood was to be shed , and had a hind brought by night and cut out her tongue and eyes , and kept them .
then said she to the queen , " i cannot have thee killed as the king commands , but here thou mayst stay no longer .
go forth into the wide world with thy child , and never come here again ."
the poor woman tied her child on her back , and went away with eyes full of tears .
she came into a great wild forest , and then she fell on her knees and prayed to god , and the angel of the lord appeared to her and led her to a little house on which was a sign with the words , " here all dwell free ."
a snow - white maiden came out of the little house and said , ' welcome , lady queen ," and conducted her inside .
then they unbound the little boy from her back , and held him to her breast that he might feed , and laid him in a beautifully - made little bed .
then said the poor woman , " from whence knowest thou that i was a queen ?"
the white maiden answered , " i am an angel sent by god , to watch over thee and thy child ."
the queen stayed seven years in the little house , and was well cared for , and by god ' s grace , because of her piety , her hands which had been cut off , grew once more . at last the king came home again from the war , and his first wish was to see his wife and the child .
then his aged mother began to weep and said , " thou wicked man , why didst thou write to me that i was to take those two innocent lives ?"
and she showed him the two letters which the evil - one had forged , and then continued , " i did as thou badest me ," and she showed the tokens , the tongue and eyes .
then the king began to weep for his poor wife and his little son so much more bitterly than she was doing , that the aged mother had compassion on him and said , " be at peace , she still lives ; i secretly caused a hind to be killed , and took these tokens from it ; but i bound the child to thy wife ' s back and bade her go forth into the wide world , and made her promise never to come back here again , because thou wert so angry with her ."
then spoke the king , " i will go as far as the sky is blue , and will neither eat nor drink until i have found again my dear wife and my child , if in the meantime they have not been killed , or died of hunger .
" thereupon the king travelled about for seven long years , and sought her in every cleft of the rocks and in every cave , but he found her not , and thought she had died of want .
during the whole of this time he neither ate nor drank , but god supported him .
at length he came into a great forest , and found therein the little house whose sign was , " here all dwell free ."
then forth came the white maiden , took him by the hand , led him in , and said , " welcome , lord king ," and asked him from whence he came .
he answered , " soon shall i have travelled about for the space of seven years , and i seek my wife and her child , but cannot find them ."
the angel offered him meat and drink , but he did not take anything , and only wished to rest a little .
then he lay down to sleep , and put a handkerchief over his face . thereupon the angel went into the chamber where the queen sat with her son , whom she usually called " sorrowful ," and said to her , " go out with thy child , thy husband hath come ."
so she went to the place where he lay , and the handkerchief fell from his face .
then said she , " sorrowful , pick up thy father ' s handkerchief , and cover his face again ."
the child picked it up , and put it over his face again .
the king in his sleep heard what passed , and had pleasure in letting the handkerchief fall once more .
but the child grew impatient , and said , " dear mother , how can i cover my father ' s face when i have no father in this world ?
i have learnt to say the prayer , ' our father , which art in heaven ,' thou hast told me that my father was in heaven , and was the good god , and how can i know a wild man like this ?
he is not my father ."
when the king heard that , he got up , and asked who they were .
then said she , " i am thy wife , and that is thy son , sorrowful ."
and he saw her living hands , and said , " my wife had silver hands ."
she answered , " the good god has caused my natural hands to grow again ;" and the angel went into the inner room , and brought the silver hands , and showed them to him .
hereupon he knew for a certainty that it was his dear wife and his dear child , and he kissed them , and was glad , and said , " a heavy stone has fallen from off mine heart ."
then the angel of god gave them one meal with her , and after that they went home to the king ' s aged mother .
there were great rejoicings everywhere , and the king and queen were married again , and lived contentedly to their happy end .
