there once lived a man and a woman .
the woman died and the man married a second time , but from his first marriage he had a daugther .
the mean stepmother didn ' t like her , beat her , and tried to think of ways to get rid of her for good .
once , when the father was away somewhere , the stepmother told the girl : " go to your step - aunt ' s , my sister ' s , ask her for a needle and some thread so that i can sew you a shirt ."
for that aunt was baba - yaga with the bony leg .
but the girl wasn ' t stupid , and first she stopped at her aunt ' s .
" hello , dear aunt !"
" hello , my darling !
what brings you ?"
" mother sent me to her sister ' s to ask for a needle and some thread so she can sew me a shirt ."
so her aunt told her what to do .
" there will be a birch , dear niece , and it will slap you in the face .
you just put a ribbon on it .
then the gates will screech and flap .
you just pour some oil on the hinges .
the dogs will bite you .
you just throw them some bread .
the cat will scratch your eyes .
you just give it some ham ."
the girl set off .
she walked for a long time , and finally arrived .
a small house stood , and baba yaga with the bony leg sat in it , weaving .
" hello , dear aunt !"
" hello , my darling !"
" mother sent me to ask for a needle and some thread so she can sew me a shirt ."
" all right , well for now , sit down and do some weaving ."
so the girl sat at the weaving loom , and baba yaga left to give order to her maid .
" go , heat up the bathhouse and give my niece a bath , and make sure she ' s nice and clean .
i want her for my breakfast ."
the girl sat still as a statue , frightened nearly to death , and asked the maid : " dearest !
don ' t spend so much time lighting the wood as pouring water on it , and don ' t hurry hauling water , use a seive for it !"
and she gave her a kerchief .
baba yaga was waiting .
she walked up to the window and asked : " are you weaving , dear niece , are you weaving , my darling ?"
" yes , i ' m weaving , auntie , i ' m weaving , my dearest !"
baba yaga stepped away .
the girl gave the cat some ham and asked it : " isn ' t there a way to get out of here ?"
" here ' s a comb and a towel ," the cat said , " take them and run away ; baba yaga will run after you .
you put your ear to the ground , and as soon as you hear that she ' s close , throw the towel first .
it will turn into a great wide river .
if baba yaga crosses the river and starts catching up again , put your ear to the ground again , and as soon as you hear that she ' s close , throw the comb .
it will turn into a deep , dark forest .
she won ' t be able to get through it !"
the girl took the towel and the comb and ran .
the dogs wanted to tear her to pieces , but she threw them some bread , and they let her pass .
the gates wanted to close , but she poured some oil on the hinges , and they let her through .
the birch wanted to slap her in the face and blind her , but she tied a ribbon around it , and it let her pass .
meanwhile , the cat sat at the weaving loom and started weaving .
he didn ' t weave so much as he tied the threads into knots .
baba yaga walked up to the window and asked : " are you weaving , dear niece , are you weaving , my darling ?
"" yes , i ' m weaving , auntie , i ' m weaving , my dearest ," the cat answered in his rough voice .
baba yaga ran into the house .
she saw that the girl was gone , and the started hitting the cat and yell at him -- why didn ' t he scratch out her eyes ?
" how many years have i served you ," the cat said , " you never even gave me a bone , and she gave me some ham ."
baba yaga became furious at the dogs , the gate , the birch , and the maid , and she started hitting and beating them .
the dogs told her : " how many years have we served you , you never even gave us a burnt crust , and she gave us some bread ."
the gate said : " how many years have i served you , you never even poured water on my hinges , and she poured oil on them ."
the birch said : " how many years have i served you , you never even tied a string around me , and she tied a ribbon ."
the maid said : " how many years have i served you , you never even gave me a rag , and she gave me a kerchief ."
baba yaga with the bony leg quickly sat in her mortar , hurried it along with the pestle , and swept her trail with a broom , and set off on the trail of the girl .
the girl put her ear to the ground , and heard that baba yaga was chasing after her , and that she was close already .
she threw the towel .
it turned into a great wide river .
if baba yaga arrived at the river and she gnashed her teeth in anger .
she returned home , gathered her bulls , and brought them to the river .
the bulls drank up the entire river until it was dry .
baba yaga set off once again in pursuit .
the girl put her ear to the ground again , and heard that baba yaga was close .
she threw the comb .
it turned into a deep , frightening forest .
baba yaga began gnawing on it , but try as she may , she couldn ' t gnaw through it .
she turned around and went home .
meanwhile , the man returned home and asked : " where is my daughter ?"
" she went to visit her aunt ," the stepmother said .
a little later , the girl arrived home .
" where were you ?"
her father asked her .
" oh , daddy !"
she said .
" this is the way it was .
mother sent me to my aunt ' s to get a needle and some thread to sew me a shirt , but her aunt turned out to be baba yaga , and she wanted to eat me ."
" how did you get away , daughter ?"
so the girl told him .
as soon as the man found out everything , he became very angry at his wife and shot her to death .
from then on , he lived happily ever after with his daughter , and amassed a great fortune .
and i was there , and i drank mead and beer : it ran down my mustache , but didn ' t get into my mouth .
