an aged count once lived in switzerland , who had an only son , but he was stupid , and could learn nothing .
then said the father , " hark thee , my son , i can get nothing into thy head , let me try as i will .
thou must go from hence , i will give thee into the care of a celebrated master , who shall see what he can do with thee ."
the youth was sent into a strange town , and remained a whole year with the master .
at the end of this time , he came home again , and his father asked , " now , my son , what hast thou learnt ?"
- " father , i have learnt what the dogs say when they bark ."
- " lord have mercy on us !"
cried the father ; " is that all thou hast learnt ?
i will send thee into another town , to another master ."
the youth was taken thither , and stayed a year with this master likewise .
when he came back the father again asked , " my son , what hast thou learnt ?"
he answered , " father , i have learnt what the birds say ."
then the father fell into a rage and said , " oh , thou lost man , thou hast spent the precious time and learnt nothing ; art thou not ashamed to appear before mine eyes ?
i will send thee to a third master , but if thou learnest nothing this time also , i will no longer be thy father ."
the youth remained a whole year with the third master also , and when he came home again , and his father inquired , " my son , what hast thou learnt ?"
he answered , " dear father , i have this year learnt what the frogs croak ."
then the father fell into the most furious anger , sprang up , called his people thither , and said , " this man is no longer my son , i drive him forth , and command you to take him out into the forest , and kill him ."
they took him forth , but when they should have killed him , they could not do it for pity , and let him go , and they cut the eyes and the tongue out of a deer that they might carry them to the old man as a token . the youth wandered on , and after some time came to a fortress where he begged for a night ' s lodging .
" yes ," said the lord of the castle , " if thou wilt pass the night down there in the old tower , go thither ; but i warn thee , it is at the peril of thy life , for it is full of wild dogs , which bark and howl without stopping , and at certain hours a man has to be given to them , whom they at once devour ."
the whole district was in sorrow and dismay because of them , and yet no one could do anything to stop this .
the youth , however , was without fear , and said , " just let me go down to the barking dogs , and give me something that i can throw to them ; they will do nothing to harm me ."
as he himself would have it so , they gave him some food for the wild animals , and led him down to the tower .
when he went inside , the dogs did not bark at him , but wagged their tails quite amicably around him , ate what he set before them , and did not hurt one hair of his head .
next morning , to the astonishment of everyone , he came out again safe and unharmed , and said to the lord of the castle , " the dogs have revealed to me , in their own language , why they dwell there , and bring evil on the land .
they are bewitched , and are obliged to watch over a great treasure which is below in the tower , and they can have no rest until it is taken away , and i have likewise learnt , from their discourse , how that is to be done ."
then all who heard this rejoiced , and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him as a son if he accomplished it successfully .
he went down again , and as he knew what he had to do , he did it thoroughly , and brought a chest full of gold out with him .
the howling of the wild dogs was henceforth heard no more ; they had disappeared , and the country was freed from the trouble . after some time he took it into his head that he would travel to rome .
on the way he passed by a marsh , in which a number of frogs were sitting croaking .
he listened to them , and when he became aware of what they were saying , he grew very thoughtful and sad .
at last he arrived in rome , where the pope had just died , and there was great difficulty as to whom they should appoint as his successor .
they at length agreed that the person should be chosen as pope who should be distinguished by some divine and miraculous token .
and just as that was decided on , the young count entered into the church , and suddenly two snow - white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there .
the ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above , and asked him on the spot if he would be pope .
he was undecided , and knew not if he were worthy of this , but the doves counselled him to do it , and at length he said yes .
then was he anointed and consecrated , and thus was fulfilled what he had heard from the frogs on his way , which had so affected him , that he was to be his holiness the pope .
then he had to sing a mass , and did not know one word of it , but the two doves sat continually on his shoulders , and said it all in his ear .
