once on a time there were two brothers ; one was called true , and the other untrue .
true was always upright and good towards all , but untrue was bad and full of lies , so that no one could believe what he said .
their mother was a widow , and hadn ' t much to live on ; so when her sons had grown up , she was forced to send them away , that they might earn their bread in the world .
each got a little scrip with some food in it , and then they went their way . now , when they had walked till evening , they sat down on a windfall in the wood , and took out their scrips , for they were hungry after walking the whole day , and thought a morsel of food would be sweet enough .
" if you ' re of my mind ," said untrue , " i think we had better eat out of your scrip , so long as there is anything in it , and after that we can take to mine ." yes !
true was well pleased with this , so they fell to eating , but untrue got all the best bits , and stuffed himself with them , while true got only the burnt crusts and scraps . next morning they broke their fast off true ' s food , and they dined off it too , and then there was nothing left in his scrip .
so when they had walked till late at night , and were ready to eat again , true wanted to eat out of his brother ' s scrip , but untrue said " no ," the food was his , and he had only enough for himself ." nay !
but you know you ate out of my scrip so long as there was anything in it ," said true .
" all very fine , i daresay ," answered untrue ; " but if you are such a fool as to let others eat up your food before your face , you must make the best of it ; for now all you have to do is to sit here and starve .
"" very well !"
said true , " you ' re untrue by name and untrue by nature ; so you have been , and so you will be all your life long .
" now when untrue heard this , he flew into a rage , and rushed at his brother , and plucked out both his eyes .
" now , try if you can see whether folk are untrue or not , you blind buzzard !"
and so saying , he ran away and left him . poor true !
there he went walking along and feeling his way through the thick wood .
blind and alone , he scarce knew which way to turn , when all at once he caught hold of the trunk of a great bushy lime - tree , so he thought he would climb up into it , and sit there till the night was over for fear of the wild beasts .
" when the birds begin to sing ," he said to himself , " then i shall know it is day , and i can try to grope my way farther on ."
so he climbed up into the lime - tree .
after he had sat there a little time , he heard how some one came and began to make a stir and clatter under the tree , and soon after others came and when they began to greet one another , he found out it was bruin the bear , and greylegs the wolf , and slyboots the fox , and longears the hare , who had come to keep st . john ' s eve under the tree .
so they began to eat and drink , and be merry ; and when they had done eating they fell to gossiping together .
at last the fox said —" shan ' t we , each of us , tell a little story while we sit here ?" well !
the others had nothing against that .
it would be good fun , they said , and the bear began ; for you may fancy he was king of the company .
" the king of england ," said bruin , " has such bad eyesight , he can scarce see a yard before him ; but if he only came to this lime - tree in the morning , while the dew is still on the leaves , and took and rubbed his eyes with the dew , he would get back his sight as good as ever .
"" very true !"
said greylegs .
" the king of england has a deaf and dumb daughter too ; but if he only knew what i know , he would soon cure her .
last year she went to the communion .
she let a crumb of the bread fall out of her mouth , and a great toad came and swallowed it down ; but if they only dug up the chancel floor , they would find the toad sitting right under the altar rails , with the bread still sticking in his throat .
if they were to cut the toad open , and take and give the bread to the princess , she would be like other folk again as to her speech and hearing .
"" that ' s all very well ," said the fox ; " but if the king of england knew what i know , he would not be so badly off for water in his palace ; for under the great stone , in his palace - yard , is a spring of the clearest water one could wish for , if he only knew to dig for it there ."" ah !"
said the hare in a small voice ; " the king of england has the finest orchard in the whole land but it does not bear so much as a crab , for there lies a heavy gold chain in three turns round the orchard .
if he got that dug up , there would not be a garden like it for bearing in all his kingdom .
"" very true , i dare say ," said the fox ; " but now it ' s getting very late , and we may as well go home .
" so they all went away together . after they were gone , true fell asleep as he sat up in the tree ; but when the birds began to sing at dawn , he woke up , and took the dew from the leaves , and rubbed his eyes with it , and so got his sight back as good as it was before untrue plucked his eyes out . then he went straight to the king of england ' s palace , and begged for work , and got it on the spot .
so one day the king came out into the palace - yard , and when he had walked about a bit , he wanted to drink out of his pump ; for you must know the day was hot , and the king very thirsty ; but when they poured him out a glass , it was so muddy , and nasty , and foul , that the king got quite vexed .
" i don ' t think there ' s ever a man in my whole kingdom who has such bad water in his yard as i , and yet i bring it in pipes from far , over hill and dale ," cried out the king .
" like enough , your majesty ;" said true , " but if you would let me have some men to help me to dig up this great stone which lies here in the middle of your yard , you would soon see good water , and plenty of it ." well !
the king was willing enough ; and they had scarcely got the stone well out , and dug under it a while , before a jet of water sprang out high up into the air , as clear and full as if it came out of a conduit , and clearer water was not to be found in all england . a little while after the king was out in his palace - yard again , and there came a great hawk flying after his chicken , and all the king ' s men began to clap their hands and bawl out , " there he flies !"
" there he flies !"
the king caught up his gun and tried to shoot the hawk , but he couldn ' t see so far , so he fell into great grief .
" would to heaven ," he said , " there was any one who could tell me a cure for my eyes ; for i think i shall soon go quite blind !
"" i can tell you one soon enough ," said true ; and then he told the king what he had done to cure his own eyes , and the king set off that very afternoon to the lime - tree , as you may fancy , and his eyes were quite cured as soon as he rubbed them with the dew which was on the leaves in the morning .
from that time forth there was no one whom the king held so dear as true , and he had to be with him wherever he went , both at home and abroad . so one day , as they were walking together in the orchard , the king said , " i can ' t tell how it is , that i can ' t !
there isn ' t a man in england who spends so much on his orchard as i , and yet i can ' t get one of the trees to bear so much as a crab ."" well !
well !"
said true ; " if i may have what lies three times twisted round your orchard , and men to dig it up , your orchard will bear well enough ." yes !
the king was quite willing , so true got men and began to dig , and at last he dug up the whole gold chain .
now true was a rich man , far richer indeed than the king himself , but still the king was well pleased , for his orchard bore so that the boughs of the trees hung down to the ground , and such sweet apples and pears nobody had ever tasted . another day too the king and true were walking about , and talking together , when the princess passed them , and the king was quite downcast when he saw her .
" isn ' t it a pity , now , that so lovely a princess as mine should want speech and hearing ?"
he said to true .
" ay , but there is a cure for that ," said true . when the king heard that , he was so glad that he promised him the princess to wife , and half his kingdom into the bargain , if he could get her right again .
so true took a few men , and went into the church , and dug up the toad which sat under the altar - rails .
then he cut open the toad , and took out the bread and gave it to the king ' s daughter ; and from that hour she got back her speech , and could talk like other people . now true was to have the princess , and they got ready for the bridal - feast , and such a feast had never been seen before ; it was the talk of the whole land .
just as they were in the midst of dancing the bridal - dance , in came a beggar lad , and begged for a morsel of food , and he was so ragged and wretched that every one crossed themselves when they looked at him ; but true knew him at once , and saw that it was untrue , his brother .
" do you know me again ?"
said true ." oh !
where should such a one as i ever have seen so great a lord ?"
said untrue .
" still you have seen me before ," said true .
" it was i whose eyes you plucked out a year ago this very day .
untrue by name , and untrue by nature ; so i said before , and so i say now ; but you are still my brother , and so you shall have some food .
after that , you may go to the lime - tree where i sat last year ; if you hear anything that can do you good , you will be lucky .
" so untrue did not wait to be told twice .
" if true has got so much good by sitting in the lime - tree , that in one year he has come to be king over half england , what good may not i get ?"
he thought .
so he set off and climbed up into the lime - tree .
he had not sat there long , before all the beasts came as before , and ate and drank , and kept st . john ' s eve under the tree .
when they had left off eating , the fox wished that they should begin to tell stories , and untrue got ready to listen with all his might , till his ears were almost fit to fall off .
but bruin the bear was surly , and , growled and said —" some one has been chattering about what we said last year , and so now we will hold our tongues about what we know ;" and with that the beasts bade one another " good night ," and parted , and untrue was just as wise as he was before , and the reason was , that his name was untrue , and his nature untrue too .
