once on a time , but it was a long , long time ago , there were two brothers , one rich and one poor .
now , one christmas eve , the poor one hadn ' t so much as a crumb in the house , either of meat or bread , so he went to his brother to ask him for something to keep christmas with , in god ' s name .
it was not the first time his brother had been forced to help him , and you may fancy he wasn ' t very glad to see his face , but he said —" if you will do what i ask you to do , i ' ll give you a whole flitch of bacon .
" so the poor brother said he would do anything , and was full of thanks .
" well , here is the flitch ," said the rich brother , " and now go straight to hell .
"" what i have given my word to do , i must stick to ," said the other ; so he took the flitch and set off .
he walked the whole day , and at dusk he came to a place where he saw a very bright light .
" maybe this is the place ," said the man to himself .
so he turned aside , and the first thing he saw was an old , old man , with a long white beard , who stood in an outhouse , hewing wood for the christmas fire .
" good even ," said the man with the flitch .
" the same to you ; whither are you going so late ?"
said the man ." oh !
i ' m going to hell , if i only knew the right way ," answered the poor man .
" well , you ' re not far wrong , for this is hell ," said the old man ; " when you get inside they will be all for buying your flitch , for meat is scarce in hell ; but mind , you don ' t sell it unless you get the hand - quern which stands behind the door for it .
when you come out , i ' ll teach you how to handle the quern , for it ' s good to grind almost anything .
" so the man with the flitch thanked the other for his good advice , and gave a great knock at the devil ' s door . when he got in , everything went just as the old man had said .
all the devils , great and small , came swarming up to him like ants round an anthill , and each tried to outbid the other for the flitch ." well !"
said the man , " by rights my old dame and i ought to have this flitch for our christmas dinner ; but since you have all set your hearts on it , i suppose i must give it up to you ; but if i sell it at all , i ' ll have for it that quern behind the door yonder .
" at first the devil wouldn ' t hear of such a bargain , and chaffered and haggled with the man ; but he stuck to what he said , and at last the devil had to part with his quern .
when the man got out into the yard , he asked the old woodcutter how he was to handle the quern ; and after he had learned how to use it , he thanked the old man and went off home as fast as he could , but still the clock had struck twelve on christmas eve before he reached his own door .
" wherever in the world have you been ?"
said his old dame ; " here have i sat hour after hour waiting and watching , without so much as two sticks to lay together under the christmas brose ."" oh !"
said the man , " i couldn ' t get back before , for i had to go a long way first for one thing , and then for another ; but now you shall see what you shall see .
" so he put the quern on the table , and bade it first of all grind lights , then a table - cloth , then meat , then ale , and so on till they had got everything that was nice for christmas fare .
he had only to speak the word , and the quern ground out what he wanted .
the old dame stood by blessing her stars and kept on asking where he had got this wonderful quern , but he wouldn ' t tell her .
" it ' s all one where i got it from ; you see the quern is a good one , and the mill - stream never freezes , that ' s enough .
" so he ground meat and drink and dainties enough to last out till twelfth day , and on the third day he asked all his friends and kin to his house , and gave a great feast .
now , when his rich brother saw all that was on the table , and all that was behind in the larder , he grew quite spiteful and wild , for he couldn ' t bear that his brother should have anything ."
' twas only on christmas eve ," he said to the rest , " he was in such straits that he came and asked for a morsel of food in god ' s name , and now he gives a feast as if he were count or king ;" and he turned to his brother and said —" but whence , in hell ' s name , have you got all this wealth ?
"" from behind the door ," answered the owner of the quern , for he didn ' t care to let the cat out of the bag .
but later on the evening , when he had got a drop too much , he could keep his secret no longer , and brought out the quern and said —" there , you see what has gotten me all this wealth ;" and so he made the quern grind all kind of things .
when his brother saw it , he set his heart on having the quern , and , after a deal of coaxing , he got it ; but he had to pay three hundred dollars for it , and his brother bargained to keep it till hay - harvest , for he thought , if i keep it till then , i can make it grind meat and drink that will last for years .
so you may fancy the quern didn ' t grow rusty for want of work , and when hay - harvest came , the rich brother got it , but the other took care not to teach him how to handle it . it was evening when the rich brother got the quern home , and next morning he told his wife to go out into the hay - field and toss , while the mowers cut the grass , and he would stay at home and get the dinner ready .
so , when dinner - time drew near , he put the quern on the kitchen table and said —" grind herrings and broth , and grind them good and fast .
" so the quern began to grind herrings and broth ; first of all , all the dishes full , then all the tubs full , and so on till the kitchen floor was quite covered .
then the man twisted and twirled at the quern to get it to stop , but for all his twisting and fingering the quern went on grinding , and in a little while the broth rose so high that the man was like to drown .
so he threw open the kitchen door and ran into the parlour , but it wasn ' t long before the quern had ground the parlour full too , and it was only at the risk of his life that the man could get hold of the latch of the house door through the stream of broth .
when he got the door open , he ran out and set off down the road , with the stream of herrings and broth at his heels , roaring like a waterfall over the whole farm . now , his old dame , who was in the field tossing hay , thought it a long time to dinner , and at last she said —" well !
though the master doesn ' t call us home , we may as well go .
maybe he finds it hard work to boil the broth , and will be glad of my help .
" the men were willing enough , so they sauntered homewards ; but just as they had got a little way up the hill , what should they meet but herrings , and broth , and bread , all running and dashing , and splashing together in a stream , and the master himself running before them for his life , and as he passed them he bawled out ,—" would to heaven each of you had a hundred throats !
but take care you ' re not drowned in the broth .
" away he went , as though the evil one were at his heels , to his brother ' s house , and begged him for god ' s sake to take back the quern that instant ; for , said he —" if it grinds only one hour more , the whole parish will be swallowed up by herrings and broth .
" but his brother wouldn ' t hear of taking it back till the other paid him down three hundred dollars more . so the poor brother got both the money and the quern , and it wasn ' t long before he set up a farm - house far finer than the one in which his brother lived , and with the quern he ground so much gold that he covered it with plates of gold ; and as the farm lay by the sea - side , the golden house gleamed and glistened far away over the sea .
all who sailed by put ashore to see the rich man in the golden house , and to see the wonderful quern , the fame of which spread far and wide , till there was nobody who hadn ' t heard tell of it . so one day there came a skipper who wanted to see the quern ; and the first thing he asked was if it could grind salt .
" grind salt !"
said the owner ; " i should just think it could .
it can grind anything .
" when the skipper heard that , he said he must have the quern , cost what it would ; for if he only had it , he thought he should be rid of his long voyages across stormy seas for a lading of salt .
well , at first the man wouldn ' t hear of parting with the quern ; but the skipper begged and prayed so hard , that at last he let him have it , but he had to pay many , many thousand dollars for it .
now , when the skipper had got the quern on his back , he soon made off with it , for he was afraid lest the man should change his mind ; so he had no time to ask how to handle the quern , but got on board his ship as fast as he could , and set sail .
when he had sailed a good way off , he brought the quern on deck and said —" grind salt , and grind both good and fast .
" well , the quern began to grind salt so that it poured out like water ; and when the skipper had got the ship full , he wished to stop the quern , but whichever way he turned it , and however much he tried , it was no good ; the quern kept grinding on , and the heap of salt grew higher and higher , and at last down sunk the ship . there lies the quern at the bottom of the sea , and grinds away at this very day , and that ' s why the sea is salt .
