once on a time there was an old widow who lived far away from the rest of the world , up under a hill - side , with her three daughters .
she was so poor that she had no stock but one single hen , which she prized as the apple of her eye ; in short , it was always cackling at her heels , and she was always running to look after it .
well !
one day , all at once , the hen was missing .
the old wife went out , and round and round the cottage , looking and calling for her hen , but it was gone , and there was no getting it back . so the woman said to her eldest daughter , " you must just go out and see if you can find our hen , for have it back we must , even if we have to fetch it out of the hill ." well !
the daughter was ready enough to go , so she set off and walked up and down , and looked and called , but no hen could she find .
but all at once , just as she was about to give up the hunt , she heard some one calling out in a cleft in the rock —" your hen trips inside the hill ! your hen trips inside the hill !
" so she went into the cleft to see what it was , but she had scarce set her foot inside the cleft , before she fell through a trap - door , deep , deep down , into a vault under ground .
when she got to the bottom she went through many rooms , each finer than the other , but in the innermost room of all , a great ugly man of the hill - folk came up to her and asked , " will you be my sweetheart ?"" no !
i will not ," she said .
she wouldn ' t have him at any price !
not she ; all she wanted was to get above ground again as fast as ever she could , and to look after her hen which was lost .
then the man o ' the hill got so angry that he took her up and wrung her head off , and threw both head and trunk down into the cellar . while this was going on , her mother sat at home waiting and waiting , but no daughter came .
so , after she had waited a bit longer , and neither heard nor saw anything of her daughter , she said to her midmost daughter , that she must go out and see after her sister , and she added —" you can just give our hen a call at the same time ." well !
the second sister had to set off , and the very same thing befell her ; she went about looking and calling , and all at once she too heard a voice away in the cleft of the rock saying —" your hen trips inside the hill ! your hen trips inside the hill !
" she thought this strange , and went to see what it could be ; and so she too fell through the trap - door , deep , deep down , into the vault .
there she went from room to room , and in the innermost one the man o ' the hill came to her and asked if she would be his sweetheart ?
no !
that she wouldn ' t ; all she wanted was to get above ground again , and hunt for her hen which was lost .
so the man o ' the hill got angry , and took her up and wrung her head off , and threw both head and trunk down into the cellar . now , when the old dame had sat and waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her second daughter , and could neither see nor hear anything of her , she said to the youngest —" now , you really must set off and see after your sisters .
' twas silly to lose the hen , but ' twill be sillier still if we lose both your sisters ; and you can give the hen a call at the same time "— for the old dame ' s heart was still set on her hen . yes !
the youngest was ready enough to go ; so she walked up and down , hunting for her sisters and calling the hen , but she could neither see nor hear anything of them .
so at last she too came , up to the cleft in the rock , and heard how something said —" your hen trips inside the hill ! your hen trips inside the hill !
" she thought this strange , so she too went to see what it was , and fell through the trap - door too , deep , deep down , into a vault .
when she reached the bottom she went from one room to another , each grander than the other ; but she wasn ' t at all afraid , and took good time to look about her .
so , as she was peeping into this and that , she cast her eye on the trap - door into the cellar , and looked down it , and what should she see there but her sisters , who lay dead .
she had scarce time to slam the trap - door before the man o ' the hill came to her and asked —" will you be my sweetheart ?
"" with all my heart ," answered the girl , for she saw very well how it had gone with her sisters .
so , when the man o ' the hill heard that , he got her the finest clothes in the world ; she had only to ask for them , or for anything else she had a mind to , and she got what she wanted , so glad was the man o ' the hill that any one would be his sweetheart . but when she had been there a little while , she was one day even more doleful and downcast than was her wont .
so the man o ' the hill asked her what was the matter , and why she was in such dumps ." ah !"
said the girl , " it ' s because i can ' t get home to my mother .
she ' s hard pinched , i know , for meat and drink , and has no one with her ."" well !"
said the man o ' the hill , " i can ' t let you go to see her ; but just stuff some meat and drink into a sack , and i ' ll carry it to her ." yes !
she would do so , she said , with many thanks ; but at the bottom of the sack she stuffed a lot of gold and silver , and afterwards she laid a little food on the top of the gold and silver .
then she told the ogre the sack was ready , but he must be sure not to look into it .
so he gave his word he wouldn ' t , and set off .
now , as the man o ' the hill walked off , she peeped out after him through a chink in the trap - door ; but when he had gone a bit on the way , he said —" this sack is so heavy , i ' ll just see what there is inside it .
" and so he was about to untie the mouth of the sack , but the girl called out to him —" i see what you ' re at ! i see what you ' re at !
"" the deuce you do !"
said the man o ' the hill ; " then you must have plaguy sharp eyes in your head , that ' s all !
" so he threw the sack over his shoulder , and dared not try to look into it again .
when he reached the widow ' s cottage , he threw the sack in through the cottage door , and said —" here you have meat and drink from your daughter ; she doesn ' t want for anything .
" so , when the girl had been in the hill a good bit longer , one day a billy - goat fell down the trap - door .
" who sent for you , i should like to know ?
you long - bearded beast !"
said the man o ' the hill , who was in an awful rage , and with that he whipped up the goat , and wrung his head off , and threw him down into the cellar ." oh !"
said the girl , " why did you do that ?
i might have had the goat to play with down here ."" well !"
said the man o ' the hill , " you needn ' t be so down in the mouth about it , i should think , for i can soon put life into the billy - goat again .
" so saying , he took a flask which hung up against the wall , put the billy - goat ' s head on his body again , and smeared it with some ointment out of the flask , and he was as well and as lively as ever again ." ho !
ho !"
said the girl to herself ; " that flask is worth something — that it is .
" so when she had been some time longer in the hill , she watched for a day when the man o ' the hill was away , took her eldest sister , and putting her head on her shoulders , smeared her with some of the ointment out of the flask , just as she had seen the man o ' the hill do with the billy - goat , and in a trice her sister came to life again .
then the girl stuffed her into a sack , laid a little food over her , and as soon as the man o ' the hill came home , she said to him —" dear friend !
now do go home to my mother with a morsel of food again ; poor thing !
she ' s both hungry and thirsty i ' ll be bound ; and besides that , she ' s all alone in the world .
but you must mind and not look into the sack ." well !
he said he would carry the sack ; and he said , too , that he would not look into it ; but when he had gone a little way , he thought the sack got awfully heavy ; and when he had gone a bit farther he said to himself —" come what will , i must see what ' s inside this sack , for however sharp her eyes may be , she can ' t see me all this way off .
" but just as he was about to untie the sack , the girl who sat inside the sack called out —" i see what you ' re at ! i see what you ' re at !
"" the deuce you do !"
said the ogre ; " then you must have plaguy sharp eyes ;" for he thought all the while it was the girl inside the hill who was speaking .
so he didn ' t care so much as to peep into the sack again , but carried it straight to her mother as fast as he could , and when he got to the cottage door he threw it in through the door , and bawled out —" here you have meat and drink from your daughter ; she wants for nothing .
" now , when the girl had been in the hill a while longer , she did the very same thing with her other sister .
she put her head on her shoulders , smeared her with ointment out of the flask , brought her to life , and stuffed her into the sack ; but this time she crammed in also as much gold and silver as the sack would hold , and over all laid a very little food .
" dear friend ," she said to the man o ' the hill , " you really must run home to my mother with a little food again ; and mind you don ' t look into the sack ." yes !
the man o ' the hill was ready enough to do as she wished , and he gave his word too that he wouldn ' t look into the sack ; but when he had gone a bit of the way he began to think the sack got awfully heavy , and when he had gone a bit further , he could scarce stagger along under it , so he set it down , and was just about to untie the string and look into it , when the girl inside the sack bawled out —" i see what you ' re at ! i see what you ' re at !
"" the deuce you do ," said the man o ' the hill , " then you must have plaguy sharp eyes of your own .
" well , he dared not try to look into the sack , but made all the haste he could , and carried the sack straight to the girl ' s mother .
when he got to the cottage door he threw the sack in through the door , and roared out —" here you have food from your daughter ; she wants for nothing .
" so when the girl had been there a good while longer , the man o ' the hill made up his mind to go out for the day ; then the girl shammed to be sick and sorry , and pouted and fretted .
" it ' s no use your coming home before twelve o ' clock at night ," she said , " for i shan ' t be able to have supper ready before ,— i ' m so sick and poorly .
" but when the man o ' the hill was well out of the house , she stuffed some of her clothes with straw , and stuck up this lass of straw in the corner by the chimney , with a besom in her hand , so that it looked just as if she herself were standing there .
after that she stole off home , and got a sharp - shooter to stay in the cottage with her mother . so when the clock struck twelve , or just about it , home came the man o ' the hill , and the first thing he said to the straw - girl was , " give me something to eat .
" but she answered him never a word .
" give me something to eat , i say !"
called out the man o ' the hill , " for i am almost starved ." no !
she hadn ' t a word to throw at him .
" give me something to eat !"
roared out the ogre the third time .
" i think you ' d better open your ears and hear what i say , or else i ' ll wake you up , that i will !" no !
the girl stood just as still as ever ; so he flew into a rage , and gave her such a slap in the face , that the straw flew all about the room ; but when he saw that , he knew he had been tricked , and began to hunt everywhere ; and at last , when he came to the cellar , and found both the girl ' s sisters missing , he soon saw how the cat jumped , and ran off to the cottage , saying , " i ' ll soon pay her off !
" but when he reached the cottage , the sharp - shooter fired off his piece , and then the man o ' the hill dared not go into the house , for he thought it was thunder .
so he set off home again as fast its he could lay legs to the ground ; but what do you think , just as he got to the trap - door , the sun rose and the man o ' the hill burst . oh !
if one only knew where the trap - door was , i ' ll be bound there ' s a whole heap of gold and silver down there still !
