once on a time there was a farmer who had three sons ; his means were small , and he was old and weak , and his sons would take to nothing .
a fine large wood belonged to the farm , and one day the father told his sons to go and hew wood , and try to pay off some of his debts . well , after a long talk , he got them to set off , and the eldest was to go first .
but when he had got well into the wood , and began to hew at a mossy old fir , what should he see coming up to him but a great sturdy troll .
" if you hew in this wood of mine ," said the troll , i ' ll kill you !
" when the lad heard that , he threw the axe down , and ran off home as fast as he could lay legs to the ground ; so he came in quite out of breath , and told them what had happened , but his father called him " hare - heart ,"— no troll would ever have scared him from hewing when he was young , he said . next day the second son ' s turn came , and he fared just the same .
he had scarce hewn three strokes at the fir , before the troll came to him too , and said —" if you hew in this wood of mine , i ' ll kill you .
" the lad dared not so much as look at him , but threw down the axe , took to his heels , and came scampering home just like his brother .
so when he got home , his father was angry again , and said no troll had ever scared him when he was young . the third day boots wanted to set off .
" you , indeed !"
said the two elder brothers ; " you ' ll do it bravely , no doubt !
you , who have scarce ever set your foot out of the door .
" boots said nothing to this , but only begged them to give him a good store of food .
his mother had no cheese , so she set the pot on the fire to make him a little , and he put it into a scrip and set off .
so when he had hewn a bit , the troll came to him too , and said —" if you hew in this wood of mine , i ' ll kill you .
" but the lad was not slow ; he pulled his cheese out of the scrip in a trice , and squeezed it till the whey spurted out .
" hold your tongue !"
he cried to the troll , " or i ' ll squeeze you as i squeeze the water out of this white stone .
"" nay , dear friend !"
said the troll , " only spare me , and i ' ll help you to hew .
" well , on those terms the lad was willing to spare him , and the troll hewed so bravely , that they felled and cut up many , many fathoms in the day . but when even drew near , the troll said —" now you ' d better come home with me , for my house is nearer than yours .
" so the lad was willing enough ; and when they reached the troll ' s house , the troll was to make up the fire , while the lad went to fetch water for their porridge , and there stood two iron pails so big and heavy , that he couldn ' t so much as lift them from the ground ." pooh !"
said the lad , " it isn ' t worth while to touch these finger - basins .
i ' ll just go and fetch the spring itself .
"" nay , nay , dear friend !"
said the troll ; " i can ' t afford to lose my spring ; just you make up the fire , and i ' ll go and fetch the water .
" so when he came back with the water , they set to and boiled up a great pot of porridge .
" it ' s all the same to me ," said the lad ; " but if you ' re of my mind , we ' ll eat a match !
"" with all my heart ," said the troll , for he thought he could surely hold his own in eating .
so they sat down ; but the lad took his scrip unawares to the troll , and hung it before him , and so he spooned more into the scrip than he ate himself ; and when the scrip was full , he took up his knife and made a slit in the scrip .
the troll looked on all the while , but said never a word .
so when they had eaten a good bit longer , the troll laid down his spoon , saying , " nay !
but i can ' t eat a morsel more .
"" but you shall eat ," said the youth ; " i ' m only half done ; why don ' t you do as i did , and cut a hole in your paunch ?
you ' ll be able to eat then as much as you please .
"" but doesn ' t it hurt one cruelly ?"
asked the troll .
" oh ," said the youth , " nothing to speak of .
" so the troll did as the lad said , and then you must know very well that he lost his life ; but the lad took all the silver and gold that he found in the hill - side , and went home with it , and you may fancy it went a great way to pay off the debt .
