once on a time there was a princess who was so proud and pert that no suitor was good enough for her .
she made game of them all , and sent them about their business , one after the other ; but though she was so proud , still new suitors kept on coming to the palace , for she was a beauty , the wicked hussey ! so one day there came a prince to woo her , and his name was hacon grizzlebeard ; but the first night he was there , the princess bade the king ' s fool cut off the ears of one of the prince ' s horses , and slit the jaws of the other up to the ears .
when the prince went out to drive next day the princess stood in the porch and looked at him ." well !"
she cried , " i never saw the like of this in all my life ; the keen north wind that blows here has taken the ears off one of your horses , and the other has stood by and gaped at what was going on till his jaws have split right up to his ears .
" and with that she burst out into a roar of laughter , ran in , slammed to the door , and let him drive off . so he drove home ; but as he went , he thought to himself that he would pay her off one day .
after a bit , he put on a great beard of moss , threw a great fur cloak over his clothes , and dressed himself up just like any beggar .
he went to a goldsmith and bought a golden spinning wheel , and sat down with it under the princess ' window , and began to file away at his spinning wheel , and to turn it this way and that , for it wasn ' t quite in order , and besides , it wanted a stand . so when the princess rose up in the morning , she came to the window and threw it up , and called out to the beggar if he would sell his golden spinning wheel ?
" no ; it isn ' t for sale ," said hacon grizzlebeard ; but if i may have leave to sleep outside your bed - room door to - night , i ' ll give it you .
" well , the princess thought it a good bargain ; there could be no danger in letting him sleep outside her door . so she got the wheel , and at night hacon grizzlebeard lay down outside her bed - room .
but as the night wore on he began to freeze ." hutetutetutetu !
it is so cold ; do let me in ," he cried .
" you ' ve lost your wits outright , i think ," said the princess .
" oh , hutetutetutetu !
it is so bitter cold , pray do let me in ," said hacon grizzlebeard again ." hush !
hush !
hold your tongue !"
said the princess ; " if my father were to know that there was a man in the house , i should be in a fine scrape .
"" oh , hutetutetutetu !
i ' m almost frozen to death ; only let me come inside and lie on the floor ," said hacon grizzlebeard . yes !
there was no help for it .
she had to let him in , and when he was , he lay on the ground and slept like a top . some time after , hacon came again with the stand to the spinning wheel , and sat down under the princess ' window , and began to file at it , for it was not quite fit for use .
when she heard him filing , she threw up the window and began to talk to him , and to ask what he had there ." oh !
only the stand to that spinning wheel which your royal highness bought ; for i thought , as you had the wheel , you might like to have the stand too .
"" what do you want for it ? "
asked the princess ; but it was not for sale any more than the wheel , but she might have them if she would give him leave to sleep on the floor of her bedroom next night . well !
she gave him leave , only he was to be sure to lie still , and not to shiver and call out " hutetu ," or any such stuff .
hacon grizzlebeard promised fair enough , but as the night wore on he began to shiver and shake , and to ask whether he might not come nearer , and lie on the floor alongside the princess ' bed . there was no help for it ; she had to give him leave , lest the king should hear the noise he made .
so hacon grizzlebeard lay alongside the princess ' bed , and slept like a top . it was a long while before hacon grizzlebeard came again ; but when he came he had with him a golden wool - winder , and he sat down and began to file away at it under the princess ' window .
then came the old story over again .
when the princess heard what was going on , she came to the window and asked him how he did , and whether he would sell the golden wool - winder ?
" it is not to be had for money ; but if you ' ll give me leave to sleep to - night in your bed - room , with my head on your bedstead , you shall have it for nothing ," said hacon grizzlebeard .
" well !
she would give him leave , if he only gave his word to be quiet and make no noise .
so he said he would do his best to be still ; but as the night wore on he began to shiver and shake , so that his teeth chattered again ." hutetutetutetu !
it is so bitter cold !
oh , do let me get into bed and warm myself a little ," said hacon grizzlebeard .
" get into bed !"
said the princess ; " why , you must have lost your wits ."" hutetutetutetu !"
said hacon ; " do let me get into bed .
hutetutetutetu ."" hush !
hush !
be still for god ' s sake ," said the princess ; " if father knows there is a man in here , i shall be in a sad plight .
i ' m sure he ' ll kill me on the spot ."" hutetutetutetu !
let me get into bed ," said hacon grizzlebeard , who kept on shivering so that the whole room shook .
well !
there was no help for it ; she had to let him get into bed , where he slept both sound and soft ; but a little while after the princess had a child , at which the king grew so wild with rage , that he was near making an end of both mother and babe . just after this happened , came hacon grizzlebeard tramping that way once more , as if by chance , and took his seat down in the kitchen , like any other beggar . so when the princess came out and saw him , she cried , " ah , god have mercy on me , for the ill - luck you have brought on me ; father is ready to burst with rage ; do let me follow you to your home ."" oh !
i ' ll be bound you ' re too well bred to follow me ," said hacon , " for i have nothing , but a log hut to live in ; and how i shall ever get food for you i can ' t tell , for it ' s just as much as i can do to get food for myself .
"" oh yes !
it ' s all the same to me how you get it , or whether you get it at all ," she said ; " only let me be with you , for if i stay here any longer , my father will be sure to take my life .
" so she got leave to be with the beggar , as she called him , and they walked a long , long way , though she was but a poor hand at tramping .
when she passed out of her father ' s land into another , she asked whose it was ?" oh !
this is hacon grizzlebeard ' s , if you must know ," said he ." indeed !"
said the princess ; " i might have married him if i chose , and then i should not have had to walk about like a beggar ' s wife .
" so , whenever they came to grand castles , and woods , and parks , and she asked whose they were ?
the beggar ' s answer was still the same : " oh !
they are hacon grizzlebeard ' s ."
and the princess was in a sad way that she had not chosen the man who had such broad lands .
last of all they came to a palace , where he said he was known , and where he thought he could get her work , so that they might have something to live on ; so he built up a cabin by the wood - side for them to dwell in ; and every day he went to the king ' s palace , as he said , to hew wood and draw water for the cook , and when he came back he brought a few scraps of meat ; but they did not go very far . one day , when he came home from the palace , he said —" to - morrow i will stay at home and look after the baby , but you must get ready to go to the palace , do you hear ?
for the prince said you were to come and try your hand at baking .
"" i bake !"
said the princess ; " i can ' t bake , for i never did such a thing in my life .
"" well , you must go ," said hacon , " since the prince has said it .
if you can ' t bake , you can learn ; you have only got to look how the rest bake ; and mind , when you leave , you must steal me some bread .
"" i can ' t steal ," said the princess .
" you can learn that too ," said hacon ; you know we live on short commons .
but take care that the prince doesn ' t see you , for he has eyes at the back of his head .
" so when she was well on her way , hacon ran by a short cut and reached the palace long before her , and threw off his rags and beard , and put on his princely robes . the princess took her turn in the bakehouse , and did as hacon bade her , for she stole bread till her pockets were crammed full .
so when she was about to go home at even , the prince said —" we don ' t know much of this old wife of hacon grizzlebeard ' s ; i think we ' d best see if she has taken anything away with her .
" so he thrust his hand into all her pockets , and felt her all over , and when he found the bread , he was in a great rage , and led them all a sad life .
she began to weep and bewail , and said —" the beggar made me do it , and i couldn ' t help it .
"" well ," said the prince at last , " it ought to have gone hard with you ; but all the same , for the sake of the beggar you shall be forgiven this once .
" when she was well on her way , he threw off his robes , put on his skin cloak , and his false beard , and reached the cabin before her .
when she came home , he was busy nursing the baby .
" well , you have made me do what it went against my heart to do .
this is the first time i ever stole , and this shall be the last ;" and with that she told him how it had gone with her , and what the prince had said . a few days after hacon grizzlebeard came home at even and said —" to - morrow i must stay at home and mind the babe , for they are going to kill a pig at the palace , and you must help to make the sausages .
"" i make sausages !"
said the princess ; " i can ' t do any such thing .
i have eaten sausages often enough ; but as to making them , i never made one in my life .
" well , there was no help for it ; the prince had said it , and go she must .
as for not knowing how , she was only to do what the others did , and at the same time hacon bade her steal some sausages for him .
" nay , but i can ' t steal them ," she said ; " you know how it went last time .
"" well , you can learn to steal ; who knows but you may have better luck next time ?"
said hacon grizzlebeard . when she was well on her way , hacon ran by a short cut , reached the palace long before her , threw off his skin cloak and false beard , and stood in the kitchen with his royal robes before she came in .
so the princess stood by when the pig was killed , and made sausages with the rest , and did as hacon bade her , and stuffed her pockets full of sausages .
but when she was about to go home at even , the prince said —" this beggar ' s wife was long - fingered last time ; we may as well just see if she hasn ' t carried anything off .
" so he began to thrust his hands into her pockets , and when he found the sausages he was in a great rage again , and made a great to do , threatening to send for the constable and put her into the cage .
" oh , god bless your royal highness ; do let me off !
the beggar made me do it ," she said , and wept bitterly .
" well ," said hacon , " you ought to smart for it ; but for the beggar ' s sake you shall be forgiven .
" when she was gone , he changed his clothes again , ran by the short cut , and when she reached the cabin , there he was before her .
then she told him the whole story , and swore , through thick and thin , it should be the last time he got her to do such a thing . now , it fell out a little time after , when the man came back from the palace , he said —" our prince is going to be married , but the bride is sick , so the tailor can ' t measure her for her wedding gown .
and the prince ' s will is , that you should go up to the palace and be measured instead of the bride ; for he says you are just the same height and shape .
but after you have been measured , mind you don ' t go away ; you can stand about , you know , and when the tailor cuts out the gown , you can snap up the largest pieces , and bring them home for a waistcoat for me .
"" nay , but i can ' t steal ," she said ; " besides , you know how it went last time .
"" you can learn then ," said hacon , " and you may have better luck , perhaps .
" she thought it bad , but still she went and did as she was told .
she stood by while the tailor was cutting out the gown , and she swept down all the biggest scraps , and stuffed them into her pockets ; and when she was going away , the prince said —" we may as well see if this old girl has not been long - fingered this time too .
" so he began to feel and search her pockets , and when he found the pieces he was in a rage , and began to stamp and scold at a great rate , while she wept and said —" ah , pray forgive me ; the beggar bade me do it , and i couldn ' t help it .
"" well , you ought to smart for it ," said hacon ; " but for the beggar ' s sake it shall be forgiven you .
" so it went now just as it had gone before , and when she got back to the cabin , the beggar was there before her .
" oh , heaven help me ," she said ; " you will be the death of me at last by making me nothing but what is wicked .
the prince was in such a towering rage that he threatened me both with the constable and cage .
" some time after , hacon came home to the cabin at even and said —" now , the prince ' s will is , that you should go up to the palace and stand for the bride , old lass !
for the bride is still sick , and keeps her bed ; but he won ' t put off the wedding ; and he says , you are so like her , that no one could tell one from the other ; so to - morrow you must get ready to go to the palace .
"" i think you ' ve lost your wits , both the prince and you ," said she .
" do you think i look fit to stand in the bride ' s place ?
look at me !
can any beggar ' s trull look worse than i ?
"" well , the prince said you were to go , and so go you must ," said hacon grizzlebeard . there was no help for it , go she must ; and when , she reached the palace , they dressed her out so finely that no princess ever looked so smart . the bridal train went to church , where she stood for the bride , and when they came back , there was dancing and merriment in the palace .
but just as she was in the midst of dancing with the prince , she saw a gleam of light through the window , and lo !
the cabin by the wood - side was all one bright flame ." oh !
the beggar , and the babe , and the cabin ," she screamed out , and was just going to swoon away .
" here is the beggar , and there is the babe , and so let the cabin burn away ," said hacon grizzlebeard . then she knew him again , and after that the mirth and merriment began in right earnest ; but since that i have never heard tell anything more about them .
