once on a time there was a king who had a daughter , and she was such a dreadful story - teller that the like of her was not to be found far or near .
so the king gave out , that if any one could tell such a string of lies as would get her to say , " that ' s a story ," he should have her to wife , and half the kingdom besides .
well , many came , as you may fancy , to try their luck , for every one would have been very glad to have the princess , to say nothing of the kingdom ; but they all cut a sorry figure , for the princess was so given to story - telling , that all their lies went in at one ear and out of the other .
among the rest came three brothers to try their luck , and the two elder went first , but they fared no better than those who had gone before them .
last of all , the third , boots , set off and found the princess in the farm - yard .
" good morning ," he said , " and thank you for nothing .
"" good morning " said she , " and the same to you .
" then she went on —" you haven ' t such a fine farm - yard as ours , i ' ll be bound ; for when two shepherds stand , one at each end of it , and blow their ram ' s horns , the one can ' t hear the other .
"" haven ' t we though !"
answered boots ; " ours is far bigger ; for when a cow begins to go with calf at one end of it , she doesn ' t get to the other end before the time to drop her calf is come .
"" i dare say !"
said the princess .
" well , but you haven ' t such a big ox , after all , as ours yonder ; for when two men sit , one on each horn , they can ' t touch each other with a twenty - foot rule ."" stuff !"
said boots ; " is that all ?
why , we have an ox who is so big , that when two men sit , one on each horn , and each blows his great mountain - trumpet , they can ' t hear one another .
"" i dare say ," said the princess ; " but you haven ' t so much milk as we , i ' ll be bound ; for we milk our kine into great pails , and carry them in - doors , and empty them into great tubs , and so we make great , great cheeses ."" oh !
you do , do , you ?"
said boots .
" well , we milk ours into great tubs , and then we put them in carts and drive them in - doors , and then we turn them out into great brewing vats , and so we make cheeses as big as a great house .
we had , too , a dun mare to tread the cheese well together when it was making ; but once she tumbled down into the cheese , and we lost her ; and after we had eaten at this cheese seven years , we came upon a great dun mare , alive and kicking .
well , once after that i was going to drive this mare to the mill , and her back - bone snapped in two ; but i wasn ' t put out , not i , for i took a spruce sapling , and put it into her for a back - bone , and she had no other back - bone all the while we had her .
but the sapling grew up into such a tall tree , that i climbed right up to heaven by it , and when i got there , i saw the virgin mary sitting and spinning the foam of the sea into pigs '- bristle ropes ; but just then the spruce - fir broke short off , and i couldn ' t get down again ; so the virgin mary let me down by one of the ropes , and down i slipped straight into a fox ' s hole , and who should sit there but my mother and your father cobbling shoes ; and just as i stepped in , my mother gave your father such a box on the ear , that it made his whiskers curl .
"" that ' s a story !"
said the princess ; " my father never did any such thing in all his born days !
" so boots got the princess to wife , and half the kingdom besides .
