there was once a man who had a daughter who was called clever else , and when she was grown up , her father said she must be married , and her mother said , " yes , if we could only find some one that would consent to have ."
at last one came from a distance , and his name was hans , and when he proposed to her , he made it a condition that clever else should be very careful as well .
" oh ," said the father , " she does not want for brains ."
- " no , indeed ," said the mother , " she can see the wind coming up the street and hear the flies cough ."
- " well ," said hans , " if she does not turn out to be careful too , i will not have her ."
now when they were all seated at table , and had well eaten , the mother said , " else , go into the cellar and draw some beer ."
then clever else took down the jug from the hook in the wall , and as she was on her way to the cellar she rattled the lid up and down so as to pass away the time .
when she got there , she took a stool and stood it in front of the cask , so that she need not stoop and make her back ache with needless trouble .
then she put the jug under the tap and turned it , and while the beer was running , in order that her eyes should not be idle , she glanced hither and thither , and finally caught sight of a pickaxe that the workmen had left sticking in the ceiling just above her head .
then clever else began to cry , for she thought , " if i marry hans , and we have a child , and it grows big , and we send it into the cellar to draw beer , that pickaxe might fall on his head and kill him ."
so there she sat and cried with all her might , lamenting the anticipated misfortune .
all the while they were waiting upstairs for something to drink , and they waited in vain .
at last the mistress said to the maid , " go down to the cellar and see why else does not come ."
so the maid went , and found her sitting in front of the cask crying with all her might .
" what are you crying for ?"
said the maid .
" oh dear me ," answered she , " how can i help crying ?
if i marry hans , and we have a child , and it grows big , and we send it here to draw beer , perhaps the pickaxe may fall on its head and kill it ."
- " our else is clever indeed !"
said the maid , and directly sat down to bewail the anticipated misfortune .
after a while , when the people upstairs found that the maid did not return , and they were becoming more and more thirsty , the master said to the boy , " you go down into the cellar , and see what else and the maid are doing ."
the boy did so , and there he found both clever else and the maid sitting crying together .
then he asked what was the matter .
" oh dear me ," said else , " how can we help crying ?
if i marry hans , and we have a child , and it grows big , and we send it here to draw beer , the pickaxe might fall on its head and kill it ."
- " our else is clever indeed !"
said the boy , and sitting down beside her , he began howling with a good will .
upstairs they were all waiting for him to come back , but as he did not come , the master said to the mistress , " you go down to the cellar and see what else is doing ."
so the mistress went down and found all three in great lamentations , and when she asked the cause , then else told her how the future possible child might be killed as soon as it was big enough to be sent to draw beer , by the pickaxe falling on it .
then the mother at once exclaimed , " our else is clever indeed !"
and , sitting down , she wept with the rest .
upstairs the husband waited a little while , but as his wife did not return , and as his thirst constantly increased , he said , " i must go down to the cellar myself , and see what has become of else ."
and when he came into the cellar , and found them all sitting and weeping together , he was told that it was all owing to the child that else might possibly have , and the possibility of its being killed by the pickaxe so happening to fall just at the time the child might be sitting underneath it drawing beer ; and when he heard all this , he cried , " how clever is our else !"
and sitting down , he joined his tears to theirs .
the intended bridegroom stayed upstairs by himself a long time , but as nobody came back to him , he thought he would go himself and see what they were all about and there he found all five lamenting and crying most pitifully , each one louder than the other .
" what misfortune has happened ?"
cried he .
" o my dear hans ," said else , " if we marry and have a child , and it grows big , and we send it down here to draw beer , perhaps that pickaxe which has been left sticking up there might fall down on the child ' s head and kill it ; and how can we help crying at that !"
- " now ," said hans , " i cannot think that greater sense than that could be wanted in my household ; so as you are so clever , else , i will have you for my wife ," and taking her by the hand he led her upstairs , and they had the wedding at once . a little while after they were married , hans said to his wife , " i am going out to work , in order to get money ; you go into the field and cut the corn , so that we may have bread ."
- " very well , i will do so , dear hans ," said she .
and after hans was gone she cooked herself some nice stew , and took it with her into the field .
and when she got there , she said to herself , " now , what shall i do ?
shall i reap first , or eat first ?
all right , i will eat first ."
then she ate her fill of stew , and when she could eat no more , she said to herself , " now , what shall i do ?
shall i reap first , or sleep first ?
all right , i will sleep first ."
then she lay down in the corn and went to sleep .
and hans got home , and waited there a long while , and else did not come , so he said to himself , " my clever else is so industrious that she never thinks of coming home and eating ."
but when evening drew near and still she did not come , hans set out to see how much corn she had cut ; but she had cut no corn at all , but there she was lying in it asleep .
then hans made haste home , and fetched a bird - net with little bells and threw it over her ; and still she went on sleeping .
and he ran home again and locked himself in , and sat him down on his bench to work .
at last , when it was beginning to grow dark , clever else woke , and when she got up and shook herself , the bells jingled at each movement that she made .
then she grew frightened , and began to doubt whether she were really clever else or not , and said to herself , " am i , or am i not ?"
and , not knowing what answer to make , she stood for a long while considering ; at last she thought , " i will go home to hans and ask him if i am i or not ; he is sure to know ."
so she ran up to the door of her house , but it was locked ; then she knocked at the window , and cried , " hans , is else within ?"
- " yes ," answered hans , " she is in ."
then she was in a greater fright than ever , and crying , " oh dear , then i am not i ," she went to inquire at another door , but the people hearing the jingling of the bells would not open to her , and she could get in nowhere .
so she ran away beyond the village , and since then no one has seen her .
