once on a time there was a queen who was out driving , when there had been a new fall of snow in the winter ; but when she had gone a little way , she began to bleed at the nose , and had to get out of her sledge .
and so , as she stood there , leaning against the fence , and saw the red blood on the white snow , she fell a - thinking how she had twelve sons and no daughter , and she said to herself -" if i only had a daughter as white as snow and as red as blood , i shouldn ' t care what became of all my sons .
" but the words were scarce out of her mouth before an old witch of the trolls came up to her .
" a daughter you shall have ," she said , " and she shall be as white as snow , and as red as blood ; and your sons shall be mine , but you may keep them till the babe is christened .
" so when the time came the queen had a daughter , and she was as white as snow , and as red as blood , just as the troll had promised , and so they called her " snow - white and rosy - red ."
well , there was great joy at the king ' s court , and the queen was as glad as glad could be ; but when what she had promised to the old witch came into her mind , she sent for a silversmith , and bade him make twelve silver spoons , one for each prince , and after that she bade him make one more , and that she gave to snow - white and rosy - red .
but as soon as ever the princess was christened , the princes were turned into twelve wild ducks , and flew away .
they never saw them again , - away they went , and away they stayed . so the princess grew up , and she was both tall and fair , but she was often so strange and sorrowful , and no one could understand what it was that failed her .
but one evening the queen was also sorrowful , for she had many strange thoughts when she thought of her sons .
she said to snow - white and rosy - red -" why are you so sorrowful , my daughter ?
is there anything you want ?
if so , only say the word , and you shall have it .
"" oh , it seems so dull and lonely here ," said snow - white and rosy - red ; " every one else has brothers and sisters , but i am all alone ; i have none ; and that ' s why i ' m so sorrowful .
"" but you had brothers , my daughter ," said the queen " i had twelve sons who were your brothers , but i gave them all away to get you ;" and so she told her the whole story . so when the princess heard that , she had no rest ; for , in spite of all the queen could say or do , and all she wept and prayed , the lassie would set off to seek her brothers , for she thought it was all her fault ; and at last she got leave to go away from the palace .
on and on she walked into the wide world , so far , you would never have thought a young lady could have strength to walk so far . so , once , when she was walking through a great , great wood , one day she felt tired , and sat down on a mossy tuft and fell asleep .
then she dreamt that she went deeper and deeper into the wood , till she came to a little wooden hut , and there she found her brothers just then she woke , and straight before her she saw a worn path in the green moss , and this path went deeper into the wood ; so she followed it , and after a long time she came to just such a little wooden house as that she had seen in her dream . now , when she went into the room there was no one at home , but there stood twelve beds , and twelve chairs , and twelve spoons - a dozen of everything , in short .
so when she saw that she was so glad , she hadn ' t been so glad for many a long year , for she could guess at once that her brothers lived here , and that they owned the beds , and chairs , and spoons .
so she began to make up the fire , and sweep the room , and make the beds , and cook the dinner , and to make the house as tidy as she could and when she had done all the cooking and work , she ate her own dinner , and crept under her youngest brother ' s bed , and lay down there , but she forgot her spoon upon the table . so she had scarcely laid herself down before she heard something flapping and whirring in the air and so all the twelve wild ducks came sweeping in ; but as soon as ever they crossed the threshold they became princes .
" oh , how nice and warm it is in here ," they said .
" heaven bless him who made up the fire , and cooked such a good dinner for us .
" and so each took up his silver spoon and was going to eat .
but when each had taken his own , there was one still left lying on the table , and it was so like the rest that they couldn ' t tell it from them .
" this is our sister ' s spoon ," they said ; " and if her spoon be here , she can ' t be very far off herself .
"" if this be our sister ' s spoon , and she be here ," said the eldest , " she shall be killed , for she is to blame for all the ill we suffer .
" and this she lay under the bed and listened to .
" no ," said the youngest , "' twere a shame to kill her for that .
she has nothing to do with our suffering ill for if any one ' s to blame , it ' s our own mother .
" so they set to work hunting for her both high and low , and at last they looked under all the beds , and so when they came to the youngest prince ' s bed , they found her , and dragged her out .
then the eldest prince wished again to have her killed , but she begged and prayed so prettily for herself .
" oh gracious goodness !
don ' t kill me , for i ' ve gone about seeking you these three years , and if i could only set you free , i ' d willingly lose my life ."" well !"
said they , " if you will set us free , you may keep your life ; for you can if you choose .
"" yes ; only tell me ," said the princess , " how it can be done , and i ' ll do it , whatever it be .
"" you must pick thistle - down ," said the princes , " and you must card it , and spin it , and weave it ; and after you have done that , you must cut out and make twelve coats , and twelve shirts , and twelve neckerchiefs , one for each of us , and while you do that , you must neither talk , nor laugh , nor weep .
if you can do that , we are free .
"" but where shall i ever get thistle - down enough for so many neckerchiefs , and shirts , and coats ?"
asked snow - white and rosy - red .
" we ' ll soon show you ," said the princes ; and so they took her with them to a great wide moor , where there stood such a crop of thistles , all nodding and nodding in the breeze , and time down all floating and glistening like gossamers through the air in the sunbeams .
the princess had never seen such a quantity of thistle - down in her life , and she began to pluck and gather it as fast and as well as she could ; and when she got home at night she set to work carding and spinning yarn from the down .
so she went on a long long time , picking , and carding , and spinning , and all the while keeping the princes ' house , cooking , and making their beds .
at evening home they came , flapping and whirring like wild ducks , and all night they were princes , but in the morning oft ' they flew again , and were wild ducks the whole day . but now it happened once , when she was out on the moor to pick thistle if i don ' t mistake , it was the very last time she was to go thither ,- it happened that the young king who ruled that land was out hunting , and came riding across the moor , and saw her .
so he stopped there and wondered who the lovely lady could be that walked along the moor picking thistle - down , and he asked her her name , and when be could get no answer , he was still more astonished ; and at last he liked her so much , that nothing would do but he must take her home to his castle and marry her .
so he ordered his servants to take her and put her up on his horse .
snow - white and rosy - red she wrung her hands , and made signs to them , and pointed to the bags in which her work was , and when the king saw she wished to have them with her , he told his men to take up the bags behind them .
when they had done that the princess came to herself , little by little , for the king was both a wise man and a handsome man too , and he was as soft and kind to her as a doctor .
but when they got home to the palace , and the old queen , who was his step mother , set eyes on snow - white and rosy - red , she got so cross and jealous of her because she was so lovely , that she said to the king -" can ' t you see now , that this thing whom you have picked up , and whom you are going to marry , is a witch ?
why , she can ' t either talk , or laugh , or weep !
" but the king didn ' t care a pin for what she said , but held on with the wedding , and married snow - white and rosy - red , and they lived in great joy and glory ; but she didn ' t forget to go on sewing at her shirts . so when the year was almost out , snow - white and rosy - red brought a prince into the world ; and then the old queen was more spiteful and jealous than ever , and at dead of night she stole in to snow - white and rosy - red , while she slept , and took away her babe , and threw it into a pit full of snakes .
after that she cut snow - white and rosy - red in her finger , and smeared the blood over her mouth , and went straight to the king .
" now come and see ," she said , " what sort of a thing you have taken for your queen ; here she has eaten up her own babe . then the king was so downcast , he almost burst into tears , and said -" yes , it must be true , since i see it with my own eyes ; but she ' ll not do it again , i ' m sure , and so this time i ' ll spare her life .
" so before the next year was out she had another son , and the same thing happened .
the king stepmother got more and more jealous and spiteful she stole into the young queen at night while she slept , took away the babe , and threw it into a pit full of snakes , cut the young queen ' s finger , and smeared the blood over her mouth , and then went and told the king she had eaten up her own 0 then the king was so sorrowful , you can ' t think bow sorry he was , and he said -" yes , it must be true , since i see it with my own eyes , but she ' ll not do it again , i ' m sure , and so this time too i ' ll spare her life .
" well , before the next year was out , snow - white and rosy - red brought a daughter into the world , and her , too , the old queen took and threw into the pit full of snakes , while the young queen slept .
then she cut her finger , smeared the blood over her mouth , and went again to the king and said -" now you may come and see if it isn ' t as i say ; she ' s a wicked , wicked witch , for here she has gone and eaten up her third babe too .
" then the king was so sad , there was no end to it , for now he couldn ' t spare her any longer , but had to order her to be burnt alive on a pile of wood .
but just when the pile was all ablaze , and they were going to put her on it , she made signs to them to take twelve boards and lay them round the pile , and on these she laid the neckerchiefs , and the shirts , and the coats for her brothers , but the youngest brother ' s shirt wanted its left arm , for she hadn ' t had time to finish it .
and as soon as ever she had done that , they heard such a flapping and whirring in the air , and down came twelve wild ducks flying over the forest , and each of them snapped up his clothes in his bill and flew off with them . see now !"
said the old queen to the king , " wasn ' t i right when i told you she was a witch ; but make haste and burn her before the pile burns low ."" oh !"
said the king , " we ' ve wood enough and to spare , and so i ' ll wait a bit , for i have a mind to see what , the end of all this will be .
" as he spoke , up came the twelve princes riding along as handsome well - grown lads as you ' d wish to see ; but the youngest prince had a wild duck ' s wing instead of his left arm .
" what ' s all this about ?"
asked the princes .
" my queen is to be burnt ," said the king , " because she ' s a witch , and because she has eaten up her own babes .
"" she hasn ' t eaten them at all ," said the princes .
" speak now , sister ; you have set us free and saved ii now save yourself .
" then snow - white and rosy - red spoke , and told the whole story ; how every time she was brought to bed , the old queen , the king ' s stepmother , had stolen into her at night , had taken her babes away , and cut her little finger , and smeared the blood over her mouth ; and then the princes took the king , and showed him the snake - pit where three babes lay playing with adders and toads , and lovelier children you never saw . so the king had them taken out at once , and went to his stepmother , and asked her what punishment she thought that woman deserved who could find it in her heart to betray a guiltless queen and three such blessed little babes .
" she deserves to be fast bound between twelve unbroken steeds , so that each may take his share of her ," said the old queen . you have spoken your own doom ," said the king , " and you shall suffer it at once .
" so the wicked old queen was fast bound between twelve unbroken steeds , and each got his share of her .
but the king took snow - white and rosy - red , and their three children , and the twelve princes ; and so they all went home to their father and mother , and told all that had befallen them , and there was joy and gladness over the whole kingdom , because the princess was saved and set free , and because she had set free her twelve brothers .
