once on a time there was a king who had seven sons , and he loved them so much that he could never bear to be without them all at once , but one must always be with him .
now , when they were grown up , six were to set off to woo , but as for the youngest , his father kept him at home , and the others were to bring back a princess for him to the palace .
so the king gave the six the finest clothes you ever set eyes on , so fine that the light gleamed from them a long way off , and each had his horse , which cost many , many hundred dollars , and so they set off .
now , when they had been to many palaces , and seen many princesses , at last they came to a king who had six daughters ; such lovely king ' s daughters they had never seen , and so they fell to wooing them , each one , and when they had got them for sweethearts , they set off home again , but they quite forgot that they were to bring back with them a sweetheart for boots , their brother , who stayed at home , for they were over head and ears in love with their own sweethearts . but when they had gone a good bit on their way , they passed close by a steep hill - side , like a wall , where the giant ' s house was , and there the giant came out , and set his eyes upon them , and turned them all into stone , princes and princesses and all .
now the king waited and waited for his six sons , but the more he waited the longer they stayed away ; so he fell into great trouble , and said he should never know what it was to be glad again .
" and if i had not you left ," he said to boots , " i would live no longer , so full of sorrow am i for the loss of your brothers .
"" well , but now i ' ve been thinking to ask your leave to set out and find them again ; that ' s what i ' m thinking of ," said boots .
" nay , nay !"
said his father ; " that leave you shall never get , for then you would stay away too .
" but boots had set his heart upon it ; go he would ; and he begged and prayed so long that the king was forced to let him go .
now , you must know the king had no other horse to give boots but an old broken - down jade , for his six other sons and their train had carried off all his horses ; but boots did not care a pin for that , he sprang up on his sorry old steed .
" farewell , father ," said he ; " i ' ll come back , never fear , and like enough i shall bring my six brothers back with me ;" and with that he rode off . so , when he had ridden a while , he came to a raven , which lay in the road and flapped its wings , and was not able to get out of the way , it was so starved .
" oh , dear friend ," said the raven , " give me a little food , and i ' ll help you again at your utmost need .
"" i haven ' t much food ," said the prince , " and i don ' t see how you ' ll ever be able to help me much ; but still i can spare you a little .
i see you want it .
" so he gave the raven some of the food he had brought with him . now , when he had gone a bit further , he came to a brook , and in the brook lay a great salmon , which had got upon a dry place , and dashed itself about , and could not get into the water again .
" oh , dear friend ," said the salmon to the prince ; " shove me out into the water again , and i ' ll help you again at your utmost need ."" well !"
said the prince , " the help you ' ll give me will not be great , i daresay , but it ' s a pity you should lie there and choke ;" and with that he shot the fish out into the stream again . after that he went a long , long way , and there met him a wolf , which was so famished that it lay and crawled along the road on its belly .
" dear friend , do let me have your horse ," said the wolf ; " i ' m so hungry the wind whistles through my ribs ; i ' ve had nothing to eat these two years .
"" no ," said boots , " this will never do ; first i came to a raven , and i was forced to give him my food ; next i came to a salmon , and him i had to help into the water again ; and now you will have my horse .
it can ' t be done , that it can ' t , for then i should have nothing to ride on .
"" nay , dear friend , but you can help me ," said graylegs the wolf ; " you can ride upon my back , and i ' ll help you again in your utmost need ."" well !
the help i shall get from you will not be great , i ' ll be bound ," said the prince ; " but you may take my horse , since you are in such need ."
so when the wolf had eaten the horse , boots took the bit and put it into the wolf ' s jaw , and laid the saddle on his back ; and now the wolf was so strong , after what he had got inside , that he set off with the prince like nothing .
so fast he had never ridden before .
" when we have gone a bit farther ," said graylegs , " i ' ll show you the giant ' s house .
" so after a while they came to it .
" see , here is the giant ' s house ," said the wolf ; " and see , here are your six brothers , whom the giant has turned into stone ; and see here are their six brides , and away yonder is the door , and in at that door you must go .
"" nay , but i daren ' t go in ," said the prince ; " he ' ll take my life ."" no !
no !"
said the wolf ; " when you get in you ' ll find a princess , and she ' ll tell you what to do to make an end of the giant .
only mind and do as she bids you ." well !
boots went in , but , truth to say , he was very much afraid .
when he came in the giant was away , but in one of the rooms sat the princess , just as the wolf had said , and so lovely a princess boots had never yet set eyes on ." oh !
heaven help you !
whence have you come ?"
said the princess , as she saw him ; " it will surely be your death .
no one can make an end of the giant who lives here , for he has no heart in his body ."" well !
well !"
said boots ; " but now that i am here , i may as well try what i can do with him ; and i will see if i can ' t free my brothers , who are standing turned to stone out of doors ; and you , too , i will try to save , that i will .
"" well , if you must , you must ," said the princess ; " and so let us see if we can ' t hit on a plan .
just creep under the bed yonder , and mind and listen to what he and i talk about .
but , pray , do lie as still as a mouse .
" so he crept under the bed , and he had scarce got well underneath it , before the giant came ." ha !"
roared the giant , " what a smell of christian blood there is in the house !
"" yes , i know there is ," said the princess , " for there came a magpie flying with a man ' s bone , and let it fall down the chimney .
i made all the haste i could to get it out , but all one can do , the smell doesn ' t go off so soon .
" so the giant said no more about it , and when night came , they went to bed .
after they had lain a while , the princess said —" there is one thing i ' d be so glad to ask you about , if i only dared .
"" what thing is that ?"
asked the giant .
" only where it is you keep your heart , since you don ' t carry it about you ," said the princess ." ah !
that ' s a thing you ' ve no business to ask about ; but if you must know , it lies under the door - sill ," said the giant ." ho !
ho !"
said boots to himself under the bed , " then we ' ll soon see if we can ' t find it .
" next morning the giant got up cruelly early , and strode off to the wood ; but he was hardly out of the house before boots and the princess set to work to look under the door - sill for his heart ; but the more they dug , and the more they hunted , the more they couldn ' t find it .
" he has baulked us this time ," said the princess , " but we ' ll try him once more .
" so she picked all the prettiest flowers she could find , and strewed them over the door - sill , which they had laid in its right place again ; and when the time came for the giant to come home again , boots crept under the bed .
just as he was well under , back came the giant . snuff - snuff , went the giant ' s nose .
" my eyes and limbs , what a smell of christian blood there is in here ," said he .
" i know there is ," said the princess , " for there came a magpie flying with a man ' s bone in his bill , and let it fall down the chimney .
i made as much haste as i could to get it out , but i daresay it ' s that you smell .
" so the giant held his peace , and said no more about it .
a little while after , he asked who it was that had strewed flowers about the door - sill .
" oh , i , of course ," said the princess .
" and , pray , what ' s the meaning of all this ?"
said the giant ." ah !"
said the princess , " i ' m so fond of you that i couldn ' t help strewing them , when i knew that your heart lay under there .
"" you don ' t say so ," said the giant ; " but after all it doesn ' t lie there at all .
" so when they went to bed again in the evening , the princess asked the giant again where his heart was , for she said she would so like to know .
" well ," said the giant , " if you must know , it lies away yonder in the cupboard against the wall .
"" so , so !"
thought boots and the princess ; " then we ' ll soon try to find it .
" next morning the giant was away early , and strode off to the wood , and so soon as he was gone boots and the princess were in the cupboard hunting for his heart , but the more they sought for it , the less they found it .
" well ," said the princess , " we ' ll just try him once more .
" so she decked out the cupboard with flowers and garlands , and when the time came for the giant to come home , boots crept under the bed again . then back came the giant . snuff - snuff !
" my eyes and limbs , what a smell of christian blood there is in here !
"" i know there is ," said the princess ; " for a little while since there came a magpie flying with a man ' s bone in his bill , and let it fall down the chimney .
i made all the haste i could to get it out of the house again ; but after all my pains , i daresay it ' s that you smell .
" when the giant heard that , he said no more about it ; but a little while after , he saw how the cupboard was all decked about with flowers and garlands ; so he asked who it was that had done that ?
who could it be but the princess ?
" and , pray , what ' s the meaning of all this tomfoolery ?"
asked the giant .
" oh , i ' m so fond of you , i couldn ' t help doing it when i knew that your heart lay there ," said the princess .
" how can you be so silly as to believe any such thing ?"
said the giant .
" oh yes ; how can i help believing it , when you say it ?"
said the princess .
" you ' re a goose ," said the giant ; " where my heart is , you will never come .
"" well ," said the princess ; " but for all that , ' twould be such a pleasure to know where it really lies .
" then the poor giant could hold out no longer , but was forced to say —" far , far away in a lake lies an island ; on that island stands a church ; in that church is a well ; in that well swims a duck ; in that duck there is an egg , and in that egg there lies my heart ,— you darling !
" in the morning early , while it was still gray dawn , the giant strode off to the wood ." yes !
now i must set off too ," said boots ; " if i only knew how to find the way ."
he took a long , long farewell of the princess , and when he got out of the giant ' s door , there stood the wolf waiting for him .
so boots told him all that had happened inside the house , and said now he wished to ride to the well in the church , if he only knew the way .
so the wolf bade him jump on his back , he ' d soon find the way ; and away they went , till the wind whistled after them , over hedge and field , over hill and dale .
after they had travelled many , many days , they came at last to the lake .
then the prince did not know how to get over it , but the wolf bade him only not be afraid , but stick on , and so he jumped into the lake with the prince on his back , and swam over to the island .
so they came to the church ; but the church keys hung high , high up on the top of the tower , and at first the prince did not know how to get them down .
" you must call on the raven ," said the wolf . so the prince called on the raven , and in a trice the raven came , and flew up and fetched the keys , and so the prince got into the church .
but when he came to the well , there lay the duck , and swam about backwards and forwards , just as the giant had said .
so the prince stood and coaxed it and coaxed it , till it came to him , and he grasped it in his hand ; but just as he lifted it up from the water the duck dropped the egg into the well , and then boots was beside himself to know how to get it out again .
" well , now you must call on the salmon to be sure ," said the wolf ; and the king ' s son called on the salmon , and the salmon came and fetched up the egg from the bottom of the well . then the wolf told him to squeeze the egg , and as soon as ever he squeezed it the giant screamed out .
" squeeze it again ," said the wolf ; and when the prince did so , the giant screamed still more piteously , and begged and prayed so prettily to be spared , saying he would do all that the prince wished if he would only not squeeze his heart in two .
" tell him , if he will restore to life again your six brothers and their brides , whom he has turned to stone , you will spare his life ," said the wolf .
yes , the giant was ready to do that , and he turned the six brothers into king ' s sons again , and their brides into king ' s daughters .
" now , squeeze the egg in two ," said the wolf .
so boots squeezed the egg to pieces , and the giant burst at once . now , when he had made an end of the giant , boots rode back again on the wolf to the giant ' s house , and there stood all his six brothers alive and merry , with their brides .
then boots went into the hill - side after his bride , and so they all set off home again to their father ' s house .
and you may fancy how glad the old king was when he saw all his seven sons come back , each with his bride ;—" but the loveliest bride of all is the bride of boots , after all ," said the king , " and he shall sit uppermost at the table , with her by his side .
" so he sent out , and called a great wedding - feast , and the mirth was both loud and long ; and if they have not done feasting , why , they are still at it .
