once on a time there was a woman who went out to hire a herdsman , and she met a bear .
" whither away , goody ?"
said bruin .
" oh , i ' m going out to hire a herdsman ," answered the woman .
" why not have me for a herdsman ?"
said bruin .
" well , why not ?"
said the woman .
" if you only knew how to call the flock ; just let me hear .
"" ow , ow !"
growled the bear .
" no , no !
i won ' t have you ," said the woman , as soon as she heard him say that , and off she went on her way . so , when she had gone a bit farther , she met a wolf .
" whither away , goody ?"
asked the wolf .
" oh ," said she , " i ' m going out to hire a herdsman .
"" why not have me for a herdsman ?"
said the wolf .
" well , why not ?
if you can only call the flock ; let me hear ," said she .
" uh , uh !"
said the wolf .
" no , no !"
said the woman ; " you ' ll never do for me .
" well , after she had gone a while longer , she met a fox .
" whither away , goody ?"
asked the fox .
" oh , i ' m just going out to hire a herdsman ," said the woman .
" why not have me for your herdsman ?"
asked the fox .
" well , why not ?"
said she ; " if you only knew how to call the flock ; let me hear .
"" dil - dal - holom ," sung out the fox , in such a fine clear voice .
" yes ; i ' ll have you for my herdsman ," said the woman ; and so she set the fox to herd her flock . the first day the fox was herdsman he ate up all the woman ' s goats ; the next day he made an end of all her sheep ; and the third day he ate up all her kine .
so , when he came home at even , the woman asked what he had done with all her flocks ?" oh !"
said the fox , " their skulls are in the stream , and their bodies in the holt .
" now , the goody stood and churned when the fox said this , but she thought she might as well step out and see after her flock ; and while she was away the fox crept into the churn and ate up the cream .
so when the goody came back and saw that , she fell into such a rage , that she snatched up the little morsel of the cream that was left , and threw it at the fox as he ran off , so that he got a dab of it on the end of his tail , and that ' s the reason why the fox has a white tip to his brush .
