once on a time there was a man up in finnmark who had caught a great white bear , which he was going to take to the king of denmark .
now , it so fell out that he came to the dovrefell just about christmas eve , and there he turned into a cottage where a man lived , whose name was halvor , and asked the man if he could get house - room there for his bear and himself .
" heaven never help me , if what i say isn ' t true !"
said the man ; " but we can ' t give any one house - room just now , for every christmas eve such a pack of trolls come down upon us that we are forced to flit , and haven ' t so much as a house over our own heads , to say nothing of lending one to any one else ."" oh !"
said the man , " if that ' s all , you can very well lend me your house ; my bear can lie under the stove yonder , and i can sleep in the side - room .
" well , he begged so hard , that at last he got leave to stay there ; so the people of the house flitted out , and before they went everything was got ready for the trolls ; the tables were laid , and there was rice porridge , and fish boiled in lye , and sausages , and all else that was good , just as for any other grand feast . so , when everything was ready , down came the trolls .
some were great , and some were small ; some had long tails , and some had no tails at all ; some , too , had long , long noses ; and they ate and drank , and tasted everything .
just then one of the little trolls caught sight of the white bear , who lay under the stove ; so he took a piece of sausage and stuck it on a fork , and went and poked it up against the bear ' s nose , screaming out ,—" pussy , will you have some sausage ?
" then the white bear rose up and growled , and hunted the whole pack of them out of doors , both great and small . next year halvor was out in the wood on the afternoon of christmas eve , cutting wood before the holidays , for he thought the trolls would come again ; and just as he was hard at work , he heard a voice in the wood calling out —" halvor !
halvor !
"" well ," said halvor , " here i am .
"" have you got your big cat with you still ?"
" yes , that i have ," said halvor ; " she ' s lying at home under the stove , and what ' s more , she has now got seven kittens , far bigger and fiercer than she is herself .
"" oh , then , we ' ll never come to see you again ," bawled out the troll away in the wood , and he kept his word ; for since that time the trolls have never eaten their christmas brose with halvor on the dovrefell .
