once on a time there was a man who had a meadow , which lay high up on the hill - side , and in the meadow was a barn , which he had built to keep his hay in .
now , i must tell you there hadn ' t been much in the barn for the last year or two , for every st . john ' s night , when the grass stood greenest and deepest , the meadow was eaten down to the very ground the next morning , just as if a whole drove of sheep had been there feeding on it over night .
this happened once , and it happened twice ; so at last the man grew weary of losing his crop of hay , and said to his sons — for he had three of them , and the youngest was nicknamed boots , of course — that now one of them must just go and sleep in the barn in the outlying field when st . john ' s night came , for it was too good a joke that his grass should be eaten , root and blade , this year , as it had been the last two years .
so whichever of them went must keep a sharp look - out ; that was what their father said . well , the eldest son was ready to go and watch the meadow ; trust him for looking after the grass !
it shouldn ' t be his fault if man or beast , or the fiend himself , got a blade of grass .
so , when evening came , he set off to the barn , and lay down to sleep ; but a little on in the night came such a clatter , and such an earthquake , that walls and roof shook , and groaned , and creaked ; then up jumped the lad , and took to his heels as fast as ever he could ; nor dared he once look round till he reached home ; and as for the hay , why it was eaten up this year just as it had been twice before . the next st . john ' s night , the man said again it would never do to lose all the grass in the outlying field year after year in this way , so one of his sons must just trudge off to watch it , and watch it well too .
well , the next oldest son was ready to try his luck , so he set off , and lay down to sleep in the barn as his brother had done before him ; but as night wore on there came on a rumbling and quaking of the earth , worse even than on the last st . john ' s night , and when the lad heard it he got frightened , and took to his heels as though he were running a race . next year the turn came to boots ; but when he made ready to go , the other two began to laugh , and to make game of him , saying ,—" you ' re just the man to watch the hay , that you are ; you who have done nothing all your life but sit in the ashes and toast yourself by the fire .
" but boots did not care a pin for their chattering , and stumped away , as evening drew on , up the hill - side to the outlying field .
there he went inside the barn and lay down ; but in about an hour ' s time the barn began to groan and creak , so that it was dreadful to hear .
" well ," said boots to himself , " if it isn ' t worse than this , i can stand it well enough .
" a little while after came another creak and an earthquake , so that the litter in the barn flew about the lad ' s ears ." oh !"
said boots to himself , " if it isn ' t worse than this , i daresay i can stand it out .
" but just then came a third rumbling , and a third earthquake , so that the lad thought walls and roof were coming down on his head ; but it passed off , and all was still as death about him .
" it ' ll come again , i ' ll be bound ," thought boots ; but no , it did not come again ; still it was and still it stayed ; but after he had lain a little while he heard a noise as if a horse were standing just outside the barn - door , and cropping the grass .
he stole to the door , and peeped through a chink , and there , stood a horse feeding away .
so big , and fat , and grand a horse , boots had never set eyes on ; by his side on the grass lay a saddle and bridle , and a full set of armour for a knight , all of brass , so bright that the light gleamed from it .
" ho , ho !"
thought the lad it ' s you , is it , that eats up our hay ?
i ' ll soon put a spoke in your wheel ; just see if i don ' t .
" so he lost no time , but took the steel out of his tinder - box , and threw it over the horse ; then it had no power to stir from the spot , and became so tame that the lad could do what he liked with it .
so he got on its back , and rode off with it to a place which no one knew of , and there he put up the horse .
when he got home his brothers laughed , and asked how he had fared ?
" you didn ' t lie long in the barn , even if you had the heart to go so far as the field .
"" well ," said boots , " all i can say is , i lay in the barn till the sun rose , and neither saw nor heard anything ; i can ' t think what there was in the barn to make you both so afraid .
"" a pretty story !"
said his brothers ; " but we ' ll soon see how you have watched the meadow ;" so they set off ; but when they reached it , there stood the grass as deep and thick as it had been over night . well , the next st . john ' s eve it was the same story over again ; neither of the elder brothers dared to go out to the outlying field to watch the crop ; but boots , he had the heart to go , and everything happened just as it had happened the year before .
first a clatter and an earthquake , then a greater clatter and another earthquake , and so on a third time ; only this year the earthquakes were far worse than the year before .
then all at once everything was as still as death , and the lad heard how something was cropping the grass outside the barn - door , so he stole to the door , and peeped through a chink ; and what do you think he saw ?
why , another horse standing right up against the wall , and chewing and champing with might and main .
it was far finer and fatter than that which came the year before , and it had a saddle on its back , and a bridle on its neck , and a full suit of mail for a knight lay by its side , all of silver , and as grand and you would wish to see .
" ho , ho !"
said boots to himself ; " it ' s you that gobbles up our hay , is it ?
i ' ll soon put a spoke in your wheel ;" and with that he took the steel out of his tinder - box , and threw it over the horse ' s crest , which stood as still as a lamb .
well , the lad rode this horse , too , to the hiding - place where he kept the other one , and after that he went home .
" i suppose you ' ll tell us ," said one of his brothers , " there ' s a fine crop this year too , up in the hayfield .
"" well , so there is ," said boots ; and off ran the others to see , and there stood the grass thick and deep , as it was the year before ; but they didn ' t give boots softer words for all that . now , when the third st . john ' s eve came , the two elder still hadn ' t the heart to lie out in the barn and watch the grass , for they had got so scared at heart the night they lay there before , that they couldn ' t get over the fright ; but boots , he dared to go ; and , to make a long story short , the very same thing happened this time as had happened twice before .
three earthquakes came , one after the other , each worse than the one which went before , and when the last came , the lad danced about with the shock from one barn wall to the other ; and after that , all at once , it was still as death .
now when he had lain a little while he heard something tugging away at the grass outside the barn , so he stole again to the door - chink , and peeped out , and there stood a horse close outside — far , far bigger and fatter than the two he had taken before .
" ho , ho !"
said the lad to himself , " it ' s you , is it , that comes here eating up our hay ?
i ' ll soon stop that — i ' ll soon put a spoke in your wheel ."
so he caught up his steel and threw it over the horse ' s neck , and in a trice it stood as if it were nailed to the ground , and boots could do as he pleased with it .
then he rode off with it to the hiding - place where he kept the other two , and then went home .
when he got home his two brothers made game of him as they had done before , saying they could see , he had watched the grass well , for he looked for all the world as if he were walking in his sleep , and many other spiteful things they said , but boots gave no heed to them , only asking them to go and see for themselves ; and when they went , there stood the grass as fine and deep this time as it had been twice before . now , you must know that the king of the country where boots lived had a daughter , whom he would only give to the man who could ride up over the hill of glass , for there was a high , high hill all of glass , as smooth and slippery as ice , close by the king ' s palace .
upon the tip - top of the hill the king ' s daughter was to sit , with three golden apples in her lap , and the man who could ride up and carry off the three golden apples was to have half the kingdom , and the princess to wife .
this the king had stuck up on all the church - doors in his realm , and had given it out in many other kingdoms besides .
now , this princess was so lovely that all who set eyes on her fell over head and ears in love with her whether they would or no .
so i needn ' t tell you how all the princes and knights who heard of her were eager to win her to wife , and half the kingdom beside ; and how they came riding from all parts of the world on high prancing horses , and clad in the grandest clothes , for there wasn ' t one of them who hadn ' t made up his mind that he , and he alone , was to win the princess . so when the day of trial came , which the king had fixed , there was such a crowd of princes and knights under the glass hill , that it made one ' s head whirl to look at them ; and every one in the country who could even crawl along was off to the hill , for they all were eager to see the man who was to win the princess .
so the two elder brothers set off with the rest ; but as for boots , they said outright he shouldn ' t go with them , for if they were seen with such a dirty changeling , all begrimed with smut from cleaning their shoes and sifting cinders in the dusthole , they said folk would make game of them .
" very well ," said boots , " it ' s all one to me .
i can go alone , and stand or fall by myself .
" now when the two brothers came to the hill of glass the knights and princes were all hard at it , riding their horses till they were all in a foam ; but it was no good , by my troth ; for as soon as ever the horses set foot on the hill , down they slipped , and there wasn ' t one who could get a yard or two up ; and no wonder , for the hill was as smooth as a sheet of glass , and as steep as a house - wall .
but all were eager to have the princess and half the kingdom .
so they rode and slipped , and slipped and rode , and still it was the same story over again .
at last all their horses were so weary that they could scarce lift a leg , and in such a sweat that the lather dripped from them , and so the knights had to give up trying any more .
so the king was just thinking that he would proclaim a new trial for the next day , to see if they would have better luck , when all at once a knight came riding up on so brave a steed that no one had ever seen the like of it in his born days , and the knight had mail of brass , and the horse a brass bit in his mouth , so bright that the sunbeams shone from it .
then all the others called out to him he might just as well spare himself the trouble of riding at the hill , for it would lead to no good ; but he gave no heed to them , and put his horse at the hill , and went up it like nothing for a good way , about a third of the height ; and when he had got so far , he turned his horse round and rode down again .
so lovely a knight the princess thought she had never yet seen ; and while he was riding , she sat and thought to herself —" would to heaven he might only come up , and down the other side .
" and when she saw him turning back , she threw down one of the golden apples after him , and it rolled down into his shoe .
but when he got to the bottom of the hill he rode off so fast that no one could tell what had become of him .
that evening all the knights and princes were to go before the king , that he who had ridden so far up the hill might show the apple which the princess had thrown , but there was no one who had anything to show .
one after the other they all came , but not a man of them could show the apple . at even the brothers of boots came home too , and had such a long story to tell about the riding up the hill .
" first of all ," they said , " there was not one of the whole lot who could get so much as a stride up ; but at last came one who had a suit of brass mail , and a brass bridle and saddle , all so bright that the sun shone from them a mile off .
he was a chap to ride , just !
he rode a third of the way up the hill of glass , and he could easily have ridden the whole way up , if he chose ; but he turned round and rode down , thinking , maybe , that was enough for once ."" oh !
i should so like to have seen him , that i should ," said boots , who sat by the fireside , and stuck his feet into the cinders as was his wont ." oh !"
said his brothers , " you would , would you ?
you look fit to keep company with such high lords , nasty beast that you are , sitting there amongst the ashes .
" next day the brothers were all for setting off again , and boots begged them this time , too , to let him go with them and see the riding ; but no , they wouldn ' t have him at any price , he was too ugly and nasty , they said .
" well , well !"
said boots ; " if i go at all , i must go by myself .
i ' m not afraid .
" so when the brothers got to the hill of glass , all the princes and knights began to ride again , and you may fancy they had taken care to shoe their horses sharp ; but it was no good ,— they rode and slipped , and slipped and rode , just as they had done the day before , and there was not one who could get so far as a yard up the hill .
and when they had worn out their horses , so that they could not stir a leg , they were all forced to give it up as a bad job .
so the king thought he might as well proclaim that the riding should take place the day after for the last time , just to give them one chance more ; but all at once it came across his mind that he might as well wait a little longer , to see if the knight in brass mail would come this day too .
well , they saw nothing of him ; but all at once came one riding on a steed , far , far , braver and finer than that on which the knight in brass had ridden , and he had silver mail , and a silver saddle and bridle , all so bright that the sunbeams gleamed and glanced from them far away .
then the others shouted out to him again , saying he might as well hold hard , and not try to ride up the hill , for all his trouble would be thrown away ; but the knight paid no heed to them , and rode straight at the hill , and right up it , till he had gone two - thirds of the way , and then he wheeled his horse round and rode down again .
to tell the truth , the princess liked him still better than the knight in brass , and she sat and wished he might only be able to come right up to the top , and down the other side ; but when she saw him turning back , she threw the second apple after him , and it rolled down and fell into his shoe .
but as soon as ever he had come down from the hill of glass , he rode off so fast that no one could see what became of him . at even , when all were to go in before the king and the princess , that he who had the golden apple might show it ; in they went , one after the other , but there was no one who had any apple to show , and the two brothers , as they had done on the former day , went home and told how things had gone , and how all had ridden at the hill and none got up .
" but , last of all ," they said , " came one in a silver suit , and his horse had a silver saddle and a silver bridle .
he was just a chap to ride ; and he got two - thirds up the hill , and then turned back .
he was a fine fellow and no mistake ; and the princess threw the second gold apple to him ."" oh !"
said boots , " i should so like to have seen him too , that i should .
"" a pretty story !"
they said .
" perhaps you think his coat of mail was as bright as the ashes you are always poking about , and sifting , you nasty dirty beast .
" the third day everything happened as it had happened the two days before .
boots begged to go and see the sight , but the two wouldn ' t hear of his going with them .
when they got to the hill there was no one who could get so much as a yard up it ; and now all waited for the knight in silver mail , but they neither saw nor heard of him .
at last came one riding on a steed , so brave that no one had ever seen his match ; and the knight had a suit of golden mail , and a golden saddle and bridle , so wondrous bright that the sunbeams gleamed from them a mile off .
the other knights and princes could not find time to call out to him not to try his luck , for they were amazed to see how grand he was .
so he rode right at the hill , and tore up it like nothing , so that the princess hadn ' t even time to wish that he might get up the whole way .
as soon as ever he reached the top , he took the third golden apple from the princess ' lap , and then turned his horse and rode down again .
as soon as he got down , he rode off at full speed , and was out of sight in no time . now , when the brothers got home at even , you may fancy what long stories they told , how the riding had gone off that day ; and amongst other things , they had a deal to say about the knight in golden mail .
" he just was a chap to ride !"
they said ; " so grand a knight isn ' t to be found in the wide world ."" oh !"
said boots , " i should so like to have seen him ; that i should ."" ah !"
said his brothers , " his mail shone a deal brighter than the glowing coals which you are always poking and digging at ; nasty dirty beast that you are .
" next day all the knights and princes were to pass before the king and the princess — it was too late to do so the night before , i suppose — that he who had the gold apple might bring it forth ; but one came after another , first the princes , and then the knights , and still no one could show the gold apple .
" well ," said the king , " some one must have it , for it was something that we all saw with our own eyes , how a man came and rode up and bore it off .
" so he commanded that every one who was in the kingdom should come up to the palace and see if they could show the apple .
well , they all came , one after another , but no one had the golden apple , and after a long time the two brothers of boots came .
they were the last of all , so the king asked them if there was no one else in the kingdom who hadn ' t come .
" oh , yes ," said they ; " we have a brother , but he never carried off the golden apple .
he hasn ' t stirred out of the dust - hole on any of the three days .
"" never mind that ," said the king ; " he may as well come up to the palace like the rest .
" so boots had to go up to the palace .
" how , now ," said the king ; " have you got the golden apple ?
speak out !
"" yes , i have ," said boots ; " here is the first , and here is the second , and here is the third too ;" and with that he pulled all three golden apples out of his pocket , and at the same time threw off his sooty rags , and stood before them in his gleaming golden mail ." yes !"
said the king ; " you shall have my daughter , and half my kingdom , for you well deserve both her and it .
" so they got ready for the wedding , and boots got the princess to wife , and there was great merry - making at the bridal - feast , you may fancy , for they could all be merry though they couldn ' t ride up the hill of glass ; and all i can say is , if they haven ' t left off their merry - making yet , why they ' re still at it .
