once on a time , in the days when our lord and st . peter used to wander on earth , they came to a smith ' s house .
he had made a bargain with the devil that the fiend should have him after seven years , but during that time he was to be the master of all masters in his trade , and to this bargain both he and the devil had signed their names .
so he had stuck up in great letters over the door of his forge ,—" here dwells the master over all masters .
" now when our lord passed by and saw that , he went in .
" who are you ?"
he said to the smith .
" read what ' s written over the door ," said the smith ; " but maybe you can ' t read writing .
if so , you must wait till some one comes to help you .
" before our lord had time to answer him , a man came with his horse , which he begged the smith to shoe .
" might i have leave to shoe it ?"
asked our lord .
" you may try , if you like ," said the smith ; " you can ' t do it so badly that i shall not be able to make it right again .
" so our lord went out and took one leg off the horse , and laid it in the furnace , and made the shoe red - hot ; after that he turned up the ends of the shoe , and filed down the heads of the nails , and clenched the points ; and then he put back the leg safe and sound on the horse again .
and when he was done with that leg , he took the other foreleg and did the same with it ; and when he was done with that he took the hind - legs — first the off , and then the near leg , and laid them in the furnace , making the shoes red - hot , turning up the ends , filing the heads of the nails , and clenching the points and after all was done , putting the legs on the horse again .
all the while the smith stood by and looked on .
" you ' re not so bad a smith after all ," said he .
" oh , you think so , do you ?"
said our lord . a little while after came the smith ' s mother to the forge , and called him to come home and eat his dinner ; she was an old , old woman , with an ugly crook on her back , and wrinkles in her face , and it was as much as she could do to crawl along .
" mark now what you see ," said our lord . then he took the woman and laid her in the furnace , and smithied a lovely young maiden out of her .
" well ," said the smith , " i say now , as i said before , you are not such a bad smith after all .
there it stands over my door — here dwells the master over all masters ; but for all that , i say right out , one learns as long as one lives ;" and with that he walked off to his house and ate his dinner . so after dinner , just after he had got back to his forge , a man came riding up to have his horse shod .
" it shall be done in the twinkling of an eye ," said the smith , " for i have just learnt a new way to shoe ; and a very good way it is when the days are short .
" so he began to cut and hack till he had got all the horse ' s legs off , for he said , i don ' t know why one should go pottering backwards and forwards — first with one leg , and then with another . then he laid the legs in the furnace , just as he had seen our lord lay them , and threw on a great heap of coal , and made his mates work the bellows bravely ; but it went as one might suppose it would go .
the legs were burnt to ashes , and the smith had to pay for the horse . well , he didn ' t care much about that , but just then an old beggar - woman came along the road , and he thought to himself , " better luck next time ;" so he took the old dame and laid her in the furnace , and though she begged and prayed hard for her life , it was no good .
" you ' re so old , you don ' t know what is good for you ," said the smith ; " now you shall be a lovely young maiden in half no time , and for all that , i ' ll not charge you a penny for the job .
" but it went no better with the poor old woman than with the horse ' s legs .
" that was ill done , and i say it ," said our lord ." oh !
for that matter ," said the smith , " there ' s not many who ' ll ask after her , i ' ll be bound ; but it ' s a shame of the devil , if this is the way he holds to what is written up over the door .
"" if you might have three wishes from me ," said our lord , " what would you wish for ?
"" only try me ," said the smith , " and you ' ll soon know .
" so our lord gave him three wishes .
" well ," said the smith , " first and foremost , i wish that any one whom i ask to climb up into the pear - tree that stands outside by the wall of my forge , may stay sitting there till i ask him to come down again .
the second wish i wish is , that any one whom i ask to sit down in my easy chair which stands inside the workshop yonder , may stay sitting there till i ask him to get up .
last of all , i wish that any one whom i ask to creep into the steel purse which i have in my pocket , may stay in it till i give him leave to creep out again .
"" you have wished as a wicked man ," said st . peter ; " first and foremost , you should have wished for god ' s grace and good will .
"" i durstn ' t look so high as that ," said the smith ; and after that our lord and st . peter bade him " good - bye ," and went on their way . well , the years went on and on , and when the time was up , the devil came to fetch the smith , as it was written in their bargain .
" are you ready ?"
he said , as he stuck his nose in at the door of the forge .
" oh ," said the smith , " i must just hammer the head of this tenpenny nail first ; meantime you can just climb up into the pear - tree , and pluck yourself a pear to gnaw at ; you must be both hungry and thirsty after your journey .
" so the devil thanked him for his kind offer , and climbed up into the pear - tree .
" very good ," said the smith ; " but now , on thinking the matter over , i find i shall never be able to have done hammering the head of this nail till four years are out at least , this iron is so plaguy hard ; down you can ' t come in all that time , but may sit up there and rest your bones .
" when the devil heard this , he begged and prayed till his voice was as thin as a silver penny that he might have leave to come down ; but there was no help for it .
there he was , and there he must stay .
at last he had to give his word of honour not to come again till the four years were out , which the smith had spoken of , and then the smith said , " very well , now you may come down .
" so when the time was up , the devil came again to fetch the smith .
" you ' re ready now , of course ," said he ; " you ' ve had time enough to hammer the head of that nail , i should think .
"" yes , the head is right enough now ," said the smith ; " but still you have come a little tiny bit too soon , for i haven ' t quite done sharpening the point ; such plaguy hard iron i never hammered in all my born days .
so while i work at the point , you may just as well sit down in my easy chair and rest yourself ; i ' ll be bound you ' re weary after coming so far .
"" thank you kindly ," said the devil , and down he plumped into the easy chair ; but just as he had made himself comfortable , the smith said , on second thoughts he found he couldn ' t get the point sharp till four years were out .
first of all , the devil begged so prettily to be let out of the chair , and afterwards , waxing wroth , he began to threaten and scold ; but the smith kept on , all the while excusing himself , and saying it was all the iron ' s fault , it was so plaguy hard , and telling the devil he was not so badly off to have to sit quietly in an easy - chair , and that he would let him out to the minute when the four years were over .
well , at last there was no help for it , and the devil had to give his word of honour not to fetch the smith till the four years were out ; and then the smith said ,—" well now , you may get up and be off about your business ," and away went the devil as fast as he could lay legs to the ground . when the four years were over the devil came again to fetch the smith , and he called out , as he stuck his nose in at the door of the forge ,—" now , i know you must be ready .
"" ready , ay , ready ," answered the smith ; " we can go now as soon as you please ; but hark ye , there is one thing i have stood here and thought , and thought , i would ask you to tell me .
is it true what people say , that the devil can make himself as small as he pleases ?
"" god knows , it is the very truth ," said the devil ." oh !"
said the smith ; " it is true , is it ?
then i wish you would just be so good as to creep into this steel purse of mine , and see whether it is sound at the bottom , for , to tell you the truth , i ' m afraid my travelling money will drop out .
"" with all my heart ," said the devil , who made himself small in a trice , and crept into the purse ; but he was scarce in when the smith snapped to the clasp .
" yes ," called out the devil inside the purse ; " it ' s right and tight everywhere .
"" very good ," said the smith ; " i ' m glad to hear you say so , but ' more haste the worse speed ,' says the old saw , and ' forewarned is forearmed ,' says another ; so i ' ll just weld these links a little together , just for safety ' s sake ;" and with that he laid the purse in the furnace , and made it red hot ." au !
au !"
screamed the devil , " are you mad ?
don ' t you know i ' m inside the purse ?
"" yes , i do !"
said the smith ; " but i can ' t help you , for another old saw says , ' one must strike while the iron is hot ;' " and as he said this , he took up his sledge - hammer , laid the purse on the anvil , and let fly at it as hard as he could ." au !
au !
au !"
bellowed the devil , inside the purse .
" dear friend , do let me out , and i ' ll never come near you again .
"" very well !"
said the smith ; " now , i think , the links are pretty well welded , and you may come out ;" so he unclasped the purse , and away went the devil in such a hurry that he didn ' t once look behind him . now , some time after , it came across the smith ' s mind that he had done a silly thing in making the devil his enemy , for he said to himself ,—" if , as is like enough , they won ' t have me in the kingdom of heaven , i shall be in danger of being houseless , since i ' ve fallen out with him who rules over hell .
" so he made up his mind it would be best to try to get either into hell or heaven , and to try at once , rather than to put it off any longer , so that he might know how things really stood .
then he threw his sledge - hammer over his shoulder and set off ; and when he had gone a good bit of the way , he came to a place where two roads met , and where the path to the kingdom of heaven parts from the path that leads to hell , and here he overtook a tailor , who was pelting along with his goose in his hand .
" good day ," said the smith ; " whither are you off to ?
"" to the kingdom of heaven ," said the tailor , " if i can only get into it ;— but whither are you going yourself ?
"" oh , our ways don ' t run together ," said the smith ; " for i have made up my mind to try first in hell , as the devil and i know something of one another from old times .
" so they bade one another " good - bye ," and each went his way ; but the smith was a stout strong man , and got over the ground far faster than the tailor , and so it wasn ' t long before he stood at the gates of hell .
then he called the watch , and bade him go and tell the devil there was some one outside who wished to speak a word with him .
" go out ," said the devil to the watch , " and ask him who he is ?"
so that when the watch came and told him that , the smith answered ,—" go and greet the devil in my name , and say it is the smith who owns the purse he wots off ; and beg him prettily to let me in at once , for i worked at my forge till noon , and i have had a long walk since .
" but when the devil heard who it was he charged the watch to go back and lock up all the nine locks on the gates of hell .
" and , besides ," he said , " you may as well put on a padlock , for if he only once gets in , he ' ll turn hell topsy - turvy !"" well !"
said the smith to himself , when he saw them busy bolting up the gates , " there ' s no lodging to be got here , that ' s plain ; so i may as well try my luck in the kingdom of heaven ;" and with that he turned round and went back till he reached the cross - roads , and then he went along the path the tailor had taken .
and now , as he was cross at having gone backwards and forwards so far for no good , he strode along with all his might , and reached the gate of heaven just as st . peter was opening it a very little , just enough to let the half - starved tailor slip in .
the smith was still six or seven strides off the gate , so he thought to himself , " now there ' s no time to be lost ;" and grasping his sledge - hammer , he hurled it into the opening of the door just as the tailor slunk in ; and if the smith didn ' t get in then , when the door was ajar , why i don ' t know what has become of him .
