there was once a mother who had two daughters : one was bad and the other was very good .
but the mother loved the bad one more than the good one .
she said one day to the bad one : " go and draw a bucket of water ."
the bad one did not want to go , and so she would not obey her mother .
the good daughter , however , said : " i will go and draw it ."
she went to draw the water , and the bucket fell down the well .
she said : " if i go home now without the bucket , who knows what my mother will do to me ?"
so she climbed down the well , and at the bottom found a narrow passage , with a door .
she knocked at the door .
" have you not found a cord and bucket ?"
there was a saint there , who answered : " no , my child ."
she continued her way and found another door .
" have you not found a cord and bucket ?"
" no !"
that was the devil there .
he answered her angrily because she was a good girl ; he did not say : " my child ."
she knocked at another door .
" have you not found a cord and bucket ?"
it was the madonna who replied : " yes , my child .
listen .
you could do me a plea sure to stay here while i am away .
i have my little son here , to whom you will give his soup ; you will sweep and put the house in order .
when i come home i will give you your bucket ."
the madonna went away , and the good girl put the house in order , gave the child his broth , swept the house ; and while she was sweeping , instead of finding dirt , she found coral and other beautiful things .
she saw that it was not dirt , and put it aside to give the madonna when she returned .
when the madonna came back , she asked : " have you done all i told you to do ?"
the good girl answered : " yes , but i have kept these things here ; i found them on the ground ; it is not dirt ."
" very well ; keep them for yourself .
would you like a dress of calico , or one of silk ?"
the girl answered : " no , no !
a calico dress ."
instead of that , the madonna gave her the silk one .
" do you wish a brass thimble , or a silver one ?"
" give me the brass one ."
" no , take the silver thimble .
here is the bucket and your cord .
when you reach the end of this passage , look up in the air ."
the girl did so , and a beautiful star fell on her brow . she went home , and her mother ran to meet her to scold her for being away so long ; and was about to strike her , when she saw the star on her brow , which shone so that it was beautiful to see , and said : " where have you been until now ?
who put that thing on your forehead ?"
the girl answered : " i don ' t know what there is there ."
her mother tried to wash it away , but instead of disappearing , it shone more beautiful than ever .
then the girl told what had happened to her , and the other sister wished to go there , too .
she went , and did the same as her sister .
she let the bucket fall , climbed down , and knocked at the saint ' s door .
" have you not found a cord and bucket ?"
" no , my child ."
she knocked at the next door .
" have you not found a cord and bucket ?"
the devil answered : " no , i have not found them ; but come here , my child , come here ."
but when she heard that he had not found her bucket , she said : " no , i will go on ."
she heard that he had not found her bucket , she said : " no , i will go on ."
she knocked at the madonna ' s door .
" have you not found a cord and bucket ?"
the madonna said that she had .
" i am going away : you will give my son his broth , and then you will sweep .
when i return i will give you your bucket ."
instead of giving the broth to the child , the bad girl ate it herself .
" oh !"
she said , " how good it was !"
she swept and found a great deal of dirt .
" oh , poor me !
my sister found so many pretty things !"
the madonna returned .
" have you done what i told you ?"
" yes ."
" do you wish the brass or silver thimble ?"
" oh !
i want the silver one !"
she gave her the brass one .
" do you want the calico dress or the silk one ?"
" give me the silk dress ."
she gave her the calico dress .
" here is your bucket and cord .
when you are out of here , look up into the air ."
when she was out she looked up into the air and there fell on her forehead a lump of dirt that soiled her whole face .
she went home in a rage to weep and scold her sister because she had had the star , while she had that dirt on her face .
her mother began to wash her face and rub it ; and the more she did so the less the dirt went away .
then the mother said : " i understand ; the madonna has done this to show me that i loved the bad girl and neglected the good one ."
