once on a time there was an old wife who sat and baked .
now you must know that this old wife had a little son , who was so plump and fat , and so fond of good things , that they called him buttercup ; she had a dog , too , whose name was goldtooth , and as she was baking , all at once goldtooth began to bark .
" run out , buttercup , there ' s a dear !"
said the old wife , " and see what goldtooth is barking at .
" so the boy ran out , and came back crying out ,—" oh , heaven help us !
here comes a great big witch , with her head under her arm , and a bag at her back .
"" jump under the kneading - trough and hide yourself ," said his mother . so in came the old hag .
" good day ," said she .
" god bless you !"
said buttercup ' s mother .
" isn ' t your buttercup at home to - day ?"
asked the hag .
" no , that he isn ' t .
he ' s out in the wood with his father shooting ptarmigan .
"" plague take it ," said the hag , " for i had such a nice little silver knife i wanted to give him .
"" pip , pip !
here i am ," said buttercup under the kneading - trough , and out he came .
" i ' m so old and stiff in the back ," said the hag , " you must creep into the bag and fetch it out for yourself .
" but when buttercup was well into the bag , the hag threw it over her back and strode off , and when they had gone a good bit of the way , the old hag got tired and asked ,—" how far is it off to snoring ?
"" half a mile ," answered buttercup . so the hag put down the sack on the road , and went aside by herself into the wood , and lay down to sleep .
meantime buttercup set to work and cut a hole in the sack with his knife ; then he crept out and put a great root of a fir - tree into the sack , and ran home to his mother . when the hag got home , and saw what there was in the sack , you may fancy she was in a fine rage . next day the old wife sat and baked again , and her dog began to bark , just as he did the day before .
" run out , buttercup , my boy ," said she , " and see what goldtooth is barking at .
"" well , i never !"
cried buttercup , as soon as he got out ; " if there isn ' t that ugly old beast coming again with her head under her arm , and a great sack at her back .
"" under the kneading - trough with you and hide ," said his mother .
" good day !"
said the hag , " is your buttercup at home to - day ?
"" i ' m sorry to say he isn ' t ," said his mother ; " he ' s out in the wood with his father shooting ptarmigan .
"" what a bore ," said the hag ; " here i have a beautiful little silver spoon i want to give him .
"" pip , pip !
here i am ," said buttercup , and crept out .
" i ' m so stiff in the back ," said the old witch , " you must creep into the sack and fetch it out for yourself .
" so when buttercup was well into the sack , the hag swung it over her shoulders and set off home as fast as her legs could carry her .
but when they had gone a good bit , she grew weary and asked ,—" how far is it off to snoring ?
"" a mile and a half ," answered buttercup . so the hag set down the sack , and went aside into the wood to sleep a bit , but while she slept , buttercup made a hole in the sack and got out , and put a great stone into it .
now , when the old witch got home , she made a great fire on the hearth , and put a big pot on it , and got everything ready to boil buttercup ; but when she took the sack , and thought she was going to turn out buttercup into the pot , down plumped the stone and made a hole in the bottom of the pot , so that the water ran out and quenched the fire .
then the old hag was in a dreadful rage , and said , " if he makes himself ever so heavy next time , he shan ' t take me in again .
" the third day everything went just as it had gone twice before ; goldtooth began to bark , and buttercup ' s mother said to him ,—" do run out and see what our dog is barking at .
" so out he went , but he soon came back crying out ,—" heaven save us !
here comes the old hag again with her head under her arm , and a sack at her back .
"" jump under the kneading - trough and hide ," said his mother .
" good day !"
said the hag , as she came in at the door ; " is your buttercup at home to - day ?
"" you ' re very kind to ask after him ," said his mother ; " but he ' s out in the wood with his father shooting ptarmigan .
"" what a bore now ," said the old hag ; " here have i got such a beautiful little silver fork for him .
"" pip , pip !
here i am ," said buttercup , as he came out from under the kneading - trough .
" i ' m so stiff in the back ," said the hag , " you must creep into the sack and fetch it out for yourself .
" but when buttercup was well inside the sack , the old hag swung it across her shoulders , and set off as fast as she could .
this time she did not turn aside to sleep by the way , but went straight home with buttercup in the sack , and when she reached her house it was sunday . so the old hag said to her daughter ,—" now you must take buttercup and kill him , and boil him nicely till i come back , for i ' m off to church to bid my guests to dinner .
" so , when all in the house were gone to church , the daughter was to take buttercup and kill him , but then she didn ' t know how to set about it at all .
" stop a bit ," said buttercup ; " i ' ll soon show you how to do it ; just lay your head on the chopping - block , and you ' ll soon see .
" so the poor silly thing laid her head down , and buttercup took an axe and chopped her head off , just as if she had been a chicken .
then he laid her head in the bed , and popped her body into the pot , and boiled it so nicely ; and when he had done that , he climbed up on the roof , and dragged up with him the fir - tree root and the stone , and put the one over the door , and the other at the top of the chimney . so when the household came back from church , and saw the head on the bed , they thought it was the daughter who lay there asleep ; and then they thought they would just taste the broth .
" good , by my troth !
buttercup broth ," said the old hag .
" good , by my troth ! daughter broth ," said buttercup down the chimney , but no one heeded him . so the old hag ' s husband , who was every bit as bad as she , took the spoon to have a taste .
" good , by my troth ! buttercup broth ," said he .
" good , by my troth ! daughter broth ," said buttercup down the chimney pipe . then they all began to wonder who it could be that chattered so , and ran out to see .
but when they came out at the door , buttercup threw down on them the fir - tree root and the stone , and broke all their heads to bits .
after that he took all the gold and silver that lay in the house , and went home to his mother , and became a rich man .
