once on a time there was a king , and he had a daughter who was such a scold , and whose tongue went so fast , there was no stopping it .
so he gave out that the man who could stop her tongue should have the princess to wife , and half his kingdom into the bargain .
now , three brothers , who heard this , made up their minds to go and try their luck ; and first of all the two elder went , for they thought they were the cleverest ; but they couldn ' t cope with her at all , and got well thrashed besides . then boots , the youngest , set off , and when he had gone a little way he found an ozier band lying on the road , and he picked it up .
when he had gone a little farther he found a piece of a broken plate , and he picked that up too .
a little farther on he found a dead magpie , and a little farther on still , a crooked ram ' s horn ; so he went on a bit and found the fellow to the horn ; and at last , just as he was crossing the fields by the king ' s palace , where they were pitching out dung , he found a worn - out shoe - sole .
all these things he took with him into the palace , and went before the princess .
" good day ," said he .
" good day ," said she , and made a wry face .
" can i get my magpie cooked here ?"
he asked .
" i ' m afraid it will burst ," answered the princess ." oh !
never fear ; for i ' ll just tie this ozier band round it ," said the lad , as he pulled it out .
" the fat will run out of it ," said the princess .
" then i ' ll hold this under it ," said the lad , and showed her the piece of broken plate .
" you are so crooked in your words ," said the princess , " there ' s no knowing where to have you .
"" no , i ' m not crooked ," said the lad ; " but this is ," as he held up one of the horns ." well ! "
said the princess , " i never saw the match of this in all my days .
"" why , here you see the match to it ," said the lad , as he pulled out the other ram ' s horn .
" i think ," said the princess , " you must have come here to wear out my tongue with your nonsense .
"" no , i have not ," said the lad ; " but this is worn out ," as he pulled out the shoe - sole . to this the princess hadn ' t a word to say , for she had fairly lost her voice with rage .
" now you are mine ," said the lad ; and so he got the princess to wife , and half the kingdom .
