once on a time there was a poor couple who lived in a tumble - down hut , in which there was nothing but black want , so that they hadn ' t a morsel to eat , nor a stick to burn .
but though they had next to nothing of other things , they had god ' s blessing in the way of children , and every year they had another babe .
now , when this story begins , they were just looking out for a new child ; and , to tell the truth , the husband was rather cross , and he was always going about grumbling and growling , and saying , " for his part , he thought one might have too many of these god ' s gifts ."
so when the time came that the babe was to be born , he went off into the wood to fetch fuel , saying , " he didn ' t care to stop and see the young squaller ; he ' d be sure to hear him soon enough , screaming for food .
" now , when her husband was well out of the house , his wife gave birth to a beautiful boy , who began to look about the room as soon as ever he came into the world .
" oh , dear mother !"
he said , " give me some of my brother ' s cast - off clothes , and a few days ' food , and i ' ll go out into the world and try my luck ; you have children enough as it is , that i can see .
"" god help you , my son !"
answered his mother ; " that can never be , you are far too young yet .
" but the tiny one stuck to what he said , and begged and prayed till his mother was forced to let him have a few old rags , and a little food tied up in a bundle , and off he went right merrily and manfully into the wide world .
but he was scarce out of the house before his mother had another boy , and he too looked about him and said —" oh , dear mother !
give me some of my brother ' s old clothes , and a few days ' food , and i ' ll go out into the world to find my twin - brother ; you have children enough already on your hands , that i can see .
"" god help you , my poor little fellow !"
said his mother ; " you are far too little , this will never do .
" but it was no good ; the tiny one begged and prayed so hard , till he got some old tattered rags and a bundle of food ; and so he wandered out into the world like a man , to find his twin - brother .
now , when the younger had walked a while , he saw his brother a good bit on before him , so he called out to him to stop ." halloa !
can ' t you stop ?
why , you lay legs to the ground as if you were running a race .
but you might just as well have stayed to see your youngest brother before set you off into the world in such a hurry .
" so the elder stopped and looked round ; and when the younger had come up to him and told him the whole story , and how he was his brother , he went on to say ,—" but let ' s sit down here and see what our mother has given us for food ."
so they sat down together , and were soon great friends . now when they had gone a bit farther on their way they came to a brook which ran through a green meadow , and the youngest said now the time was come to give one another names ; " since we set off in such a hurry that we hadn ' t time to do it at home , we may as well do it here .
"" well ," said the elder , " and what shall your name be ?"" oh !"
said the younger , " my name shall be shortshanks ; and yours , what shall it be ?
"" i will be called king sturdy ," answered the eldest . so they christened each other in the brook , and went on ; but when they had walked a while they came to a cross road , and agreed they should part there , and each take his own road .
so they parted , but they hadn ' t gone half a mile before their roads met again .
so they parted the second time , and took each a road ; but in a little while the same thing happened , and they met again , they scarce knew how ; and the same thing happened a third time also .
then they agreed that they should each choose a quarter of the heavens , and one was to go east and the other west ; but before they parted , the elder said ,—" if you ever fall into misfortune or need , call three times on me , and i will come and help you ; but mind you don ' t call on me till you are at the last pinch ."" well !"
said shortshanks , " if that ' s to be the rule , i don ' t think we shall meet again very soon .
" after that they bade each other good - bye , and shortshanks went east and king sturdy west . now , you must know when shortshanks had gone a good bit alone , he met an old , old , crook - backed hag who had only one eye , and shortshanks snapped it up ." oh !
oh !"
screamed the hag , " what has become of my eye ?
"" what will you give me ," asked shortshanks , " if you get your eye back ?
"" i ' ll give you a sword , and such a sword !
it will put a whole army to flight , be it ever so great ," answered the old woman .
" out with it , then !"
said shortshanks . so the old hag gave him the sword , and got her eye back again .
after that shortshanks wandered on a while , and another old , old , crook - backed hag met him who had only one eye , which shortshanks stole before she was aware of him ." oh !
oh !
whatever has become of my eye ?"
screamed the hag .
" what will you give me to get your eye back ?"
asked shortshanks .
" i ' ll give you a ship ," said the woman , " which can sail over fresh water and salt water , and over high hills and deep dales .
"" well , out with it !"
said shortshanks . so the old woman gave him a little tiny ship , no bigger than he could put in his pocket , and she got her eye back again , and they each went their way .
but when he had wandered on a long , long way , he met a third time an old , old , crook - backed hag , with only one eye .
this eye too , shortshanks stole ; and when the hag screamed and made a great to - do , bawling out what had become of her eye , shortshanks said ,—" what will you give me to get back your eye ?
" then she answered ,—" i ' ll give you the art how to brew a hundred lasts of malt at one strike .
" well , for teaching that art the old hag got back her eye , and they each went their way . but when shortshanks had walked a little way , he thought it might be worth while to try his ship ; so he took it out of his pocket , and put first one foot into it , and then the other ; and as soon as ever he set one foot into it it began to grow bigger and bigger , and by the time he set the other foot into it , it was as big as other ships that sail on the sea .
then shortshanks said ,—" off and away , over fresh water and salt water , over high hills and deep dales , and don ' t stop till you come to the king ' s palace .
" and lo !
away went the ship as swiftly as a bird through the air , till it came down a little below the king ' s palace , and there it stopped .
from the palace windows people had stood and seen shortshanks come sailing along , and they were all so amazed that they ran down to see who it could be that came sailing in a ship through the air .
but while they were running down , shortshanks had stepped out of his ship and put it into his pocket again ; for as soon as he stepped out of it , it became as small as it was when he got it from the old woman .
so those who had run down from the palace saw no one but a ragged little boy standing down there by the strand .
then the king asked whence he came , but the boy said he didn ' t know , nor could he tell them how he had got there .
there he was , and that was all they could get out of him ; but he begged and prayed so prettily to get a place in the king ' s palace , saying , if there was nothing else for him to do he could carry in wood and water for the kitchen - maid , that their hearts were touched , and he got leave to stay there . now when shortshanks came up to the palace he saw how it was all hung with black , both outside and in , wall and roof ; so he asked the kitchen - maid what all that mourning meant .
" don ' t you know ?"
said the kitchen - maid ; " i ' ll soon tell you : the king ' s daughter was promised away a long time ago to three ogres , and next thursday evening one of them is coming to fetch her .
ritter red , it is true , has given out that he is man enough to set her free , but god knows if he can do it ; and now you know why we are all in grief and sorrow .
" so when thursday evening came , ritter red led the princess down to the strand , for there it was she was to meet the ogre , and he was to stay by her there and watch ; but he wasn ' t likely to do the ogre much harm , i reckon , for as soon as ever the princess had sat down on the strand ritter red climbed up into a great tree that stood there , and hid himself as well as he could among the boughs .
the princess begged and prayed him not to leave her , but ritter red turned a deaf ear to her , and all he said was ,—" ' tis better for one to lose life than for two .
" that was what ritter red said . meantime shortshanks went to the kitchen - maid , and asked her so prettily if he mightn ' t go down to the strand for a bit .
" and what should take you down to the strand ?"
asked the kitchen - maid .
" you know you ' ve no business there .
"" oh , dear friend ," said shortshanks , " do let me go !
i should so like to run down there and play a while with the other children ; that i should .
"" well , well !"
said the kitchen - maid , " off with you ; but don ' t let me catch you staying there a bit over the time when the brose for supper must be set on the fire , and the roast put on the spit ; and let me see , when you come back mind you bring a good armful of wood with you .
" yes , shortshanks would mind all that ; so off he ran down to the strand . but just as he reached the spot where the princess sat , what should come but the ogre tearing along in his ship , so that the wind roared and howled after him .
he was so tall and stout it was awful to look on him , and he had five heads of his own .
" fire and flame !"
screamed the ogre .
" fire and flame yourself !"
said shortshanks .
" can you fight ?"
roared the ogre .
" if i can ' t , i can learn ," said shortshanks . so the ogre struck at him with a great thick iron club which he had in his fist , and the earth and stones flew up five yards into the air after the stroke ." my !"
said shortshanks , " that was something like a blow , but now you shall see a stroke of mine .
" then he grasped the sword he had got from the old crook - backed hag , and cut at the ogre ; and away went all his five heads flying over the sand .
so when the princess saw she was saved , she was so glad that she scarce knew what to do , and she jumped and danced for joy .
" come , lie down , and sleep a little in my lap ," she said to shortshanks , and as he slept she threw over him a tinsel robe . now you must know it wasn ' t long before ritter red crept down from the tree , as soon as he saw there was nothing to fear in the way , and he went up to the princess and threatened her , until she promised to say it was he who had saved her life ; for if she wouldn ' t say so , he said he would kill her on the spot .
after that he cut out the ogre ' s lungs and tongue , and wrapped them up in his handkerchief , and so led the princess back to the palace , and whatever honours he had not before he got then , for the king did not know how to find honour enough for him , and made him sit every day on his right hand at dinner . as for shortshanks , he went first of all on board the ogre ' s ship , and took a whole heap of gold and silver rings , as large as hoops , and trotted off with them as hard as he could to the palace .
when the kitchen - maid set her eyes on all that gold and silver , she was quite scared , and asked him ,—" but dear , good shortshanks , wherever did you get all this from ?"
for she was rather afraid he hadn ' t come rightly by it ." oh !"
answered shortshanks , " i went home for a bit , and there i found these hoops , which had fallen off some old pails of ours , so i laid hands on them for you if you must know .
" well , when the kitchen - maid heard they were for her , she said nothing more about the matter , but thanked shortshanks and they were good friends again . the next thursday evening it was the same story over again ; all were in grief and trouble , but ritter red said , as he had saved the princess from one ogre it was hard if he couldn ' t save her from another ; and down he led her to the strand as brave as a lion .
but he didn ' t do this ogre much harm either , for when the time came that they looked for the ogre he said , as he had said before ,—" ' tis better one should lose life than two ," and crept up into his tree again .
but shortshanks begged the kitchen - maid to let him go down to the strand for a little ." oh !"
asked the kitchen - maid , " and what business have you down there ?
"" dear friend ," said shortshanks , " do pray let me go !
i long so to run down and play a while with the other children .
" well , the kitchen - maid gave him leave to go , but he must promise to be back by the time the roast was turned , and he was to mind and bring a big bundle of wood with him .
so shortshanks had scarce got down to the strand when the ogre came tearing along in his ship , so that the wind howled and roared around him ; he was twice as big as the other ogre , and he had ten heads on his shoulders .
" fire and flame !"
screamed the ogre .
" fire and flame yourself !"
answered shortshanks .
" can you fight ?"
roared the ogre .
" if i can ' t , i can learn ," said shortshanks . then the ogre struck at him with his iron club ; it was even bigger than that which the first ogre had , and the earth and stones flew up ten yards into the air ." my !"
said shortshanks , " that was something like a blow ; now you shall see a stroke of mine ."
then he grasped his sword , and cut off all the ogre ' s ten heads at one blow , and sent them dancing away over the sand . then the princess said again to him , " lie down and sleep a little while on my lap ;" and while shortshanks lay there , she threw over him a silver robe .
but as soon as ritter red marked that there was no more danger in the way he crept down from the tree , and threatened the princess , till she was forced to give her word to say it was he who had set her free ; after that he cut the lungs and tongue out of the ogre , and wrapped them in his handkerchief , and led the princess back to the palace .
then you may fancy what mirth and joy there was , and the king was at his wits ' end to know how to show ritter red honour and favour enough . this time , too , shortshanks took a whole armful of gold and silver rings from the ogre ' s ship , and when he came back to the palace the kitchen - maid clapped her hands in wonder , asking wherever he got all that gold and silver from .
but shortshanks answered that he had been home a while , and that the hoops had fallen off some old pails , so he had laid his hands on them for his friend the kitchen - maid . so when the third thursday evening came , everything happened as it had happened twice before ; the whole palace was hung with black , and all went about mourning and weeping .
but ritter red said he couldn ' t see what need they had to be so afraid ; he had freed the princess from two ogres , and he could very well free her from a third ; so he led her down to the strand , but when the time drew near for the ogre to come up , he crept into his tree again and hid himself .
the princess begged and prayed , but it was no good , for ritter red said again ,—" ' tis better that one should lose life than two .
" that evening , too , shortshanks begged for leave to go down to the strand ." oh !"
said the kitchen - maid , " what should take you down there ?
" but he begged and prayed so , that at last he got leave to go , only he had to promise to be back in the kitchen again when the roast was to be turned .
so off he went , but he had scarce reached the strand when the ogre came with the wind howling and roaring after him .
he was much , much bigger than either of the other two , and he had fifteen heads on his shoulders .
" fire and flame !"
roared out the ogre .
" fire and flame yourself !"
said shortshanks .
" can you fight ?"
screamed the ogre .
" if i can ' t , i can learn ," said shortshanks .
" i ' ll soon teach you ," screamed the ogre , and struck at him with his iron club , so that the earth and stones flew up fifteen yards into the air ." my !"
said shortshanks , " that was something like a blow ; but now you shall see a stroke of mine .
" as he said that , he grasped his sword , and cut off all the ogre ' s fifteen heads at one blow , and sent them all dancing over the sand . so the princess was freed from all the ogres , and she both blessed and thanked shortshanks for saving her life .
" sleep now a while on my lap ," she said ; and he laid his head on her lap , and while he slept she threw over him a golden robe .
" but how shall we let it be known that it is you that have saved me ?"
she asked , when he awoke .
" oh , i ' ll soon tell you ," answered shortshanks .
" when ritter red has led you home again , and given himself out as the man who has saved you , you know he is to have you to wife , and half the kingdom .
now , when they ask you , on your wedding - day , whom you will have to be your cup - bearer , you must say , ' i will have the ragged boy who does odd jobs in the kitchen , and carries in wood and water for the kitchen - maid .'
so , when i am filling your cups , i will spill a drop on his plate , but none on yours ; then he will be wroth and give me a blow ; and the same thing will happen three times .
but the third time you must mind and say , ' shame on you !
to strike my heart ' s darling ; he it is who set me free , and him will i have .'
" after that shortshanks ran back to the palace , as he had done before ; but he went first on board the ogre ' s ship , and took a whole heap of gold , silver , and precious stones , and out of them he gave the kitchen - maid another great armful of gold and silver rings . well , as for ritter red , as soon as ever he saw that all risk was over he crept down from his tree , and threatened the princess till she was forced to promise she would say it was he who had saved her .
after that he led her back to the palace , and all the honour shown him before was nothing to what he got now , for the king thought of nothing else than how he might best honour the man who had saved his daughter from the three ogres .
as for his marrying her , and having half the kingdom , that was a settled thing , the king said .
but when the wedding - day came , the princess begged she might have the ragged boy , who carried in wood and water for the cook , to be her cup - bearer at the bridal - feast .
" i can ' t think why you should want to bring that filthy beggar boy in here ," said ritter red ; but the princess had a will of her own , and said she would have him , and no one else , to pour out her wine ; so she had her way at last .
now everything went as it had been agreed between shortshanks and the princess ; he spilled a drop on ritter red ' s plate , but none on hers , and each time ritter red got wroth and struck him .
at the first blow shortshanks ' rags fell off which he had worn in the kitchen ; at the second the tinsel robe fell off ; and at the third the silver robe ; and then he stood in his golden robe , all gleaming and glittering in the light .
then the princess said ,—" shame on you !
to strike my heart ' s darling ; he has saved me , and him will i have .
" ritter red cursed and swore it was he who had set her free ; but the king put in his word , and said ,—" the man who saved my daughter must have some token to show for it ." yes !
ritter red had something to show , and he ran off at once after his handkerchief with the lungs and tongues in it ; and shortshanks fetched all the gold and silver and precious things he had taken out of the ogres ' ships .
so each laid his tokens before the king , and the king said ,—" the man who has such precious stores of gold , and silver , and diamonds , must have slain the ogre , and spoiled his goods , for such things are not to be had elsewhere .
" so ritter red was thrown into a pit full of snakes , and shortshanks was to have the princess and half the kingdom . one day shortshanks and the king were out walking , and shortshanks asked the king if he hadn ' t any more children .
" yes ," said the king , " i had another daughter ; but the ogre has taken her away , because there was no one who could save her .
now you are going to have one daughter , but if you can set the other free , whom the ogre has carried off , you shall have her too , with all my heart , and the other half of my kingdom .
"" well ," said shortshanks , " i may as well try ; but i must have an iron cable , five hundred fathoms long , and five hundred men , and food for them to last fifteen weeks , for i have a long voyage before me .
" yes , the king said he should have them , but he was afraid there wasn ' t a ship in his kingdom big enough to carry such a freight ." oh !
if that ' s all ," said shortshanks , " i have a ship of my own .
" with that he whipped out of his pocket the ship he had got from the old hag . the king laughed , and thought it was all a joke ; but shortshanks begged him only to give him what he asked , and he should soon see if it was a joke .
so they got together what he wanted , and shortshanks bade him put the cable on board the ship first of all ; but there was no one man who could lift it , and there wasn ' t room for more than one at a time round the tiny ship .
then shortshanks took hold of the cable by one end , and laid a link or two into the ship ; and as he threw in the links , the ship grew bigger and bigger , till at last it got so big that there was room enough and to spare in it for the cable , and the five hundred men , and their food , and shortshanks , and all .
then he said to the ship ,—" off and away , over fresh water and salt water , over high hill and deep dale , and don ' t stop till you come to where the king ' s daughter is ."
and away went the ship over land and sea , till the wind whistled after it . so when they had sailed far , far away , the ship stood stock still in the middle of the sea ." ah !"
said shortshanks , " now we have got so far ; but how we are to get back is another story .
" then he took the cable and tied one end of it round his waist , and said ,—" now , i must go to the bottom , but when i give the cable a good tug , and want to come up again , mind you all hoist away with a will , or your lives will be lost as well as mine ;" and with these words overboard he leapt , and dived down , so that the yellow waves rose round him in an eddy . well , he sank and sank , and at last he came to the bottom , and there he saw a great rock rising up with a door in it , so he opened the door and went in .
when he got inside , he saw another princess , who sat and sewed , but when she saw shortshanks , she clasped her hands together and cried out ,—" now , god be thanked !
you are the first christian man i ' ve set eyes on since i came here .
"" very good ," said shortshanks ; " but do you know i ' ve come to fetch you ?"" oh !"
she cried , " you ' ll never fetch me ; you ' ll never have that luck , for if the ogre sees you , he ' ll kill you on the spot .
"" i ' m glad you spoke of the ogre ," said shortshanks ; " ' twould be fine fun to see him ; whereabouts is he ?
" then the princess told him the ogre was out looking for some one who could brew a hundred lasts of malt at one strike , for he was going to give a great feast , and less drink wouldn ' t do ." well !
i can do that ," said shortshanks ." ah !"
said the princess , " if only the ogre wasn ' t so hasty , i might tell him about you ; but he ' s so cross ; i ' m afraid he ' ll tear you to pieces as soon as he comes in , without waiting to hear my story .
let me see what is to be done .
oh !
i have it ; just hide yourself in the side - room yonder , and let us take our chance .
" well , shortshanks did as she told him , and he had scarce crept into the side - room before the ogre came in ." huf !"
said the ogre ; " what a horrid smell of christian man ' s blood !"" yes !"
said the princess , " i know there is , for a bird flew over the house with a christian man ' s bone in his bill , and let it fall down the chimney .
i made all the haste i could to get it out again , but i daresay it ' s that you smell ."" ah !"
said the ogre , " like enough .
" then the princess asked the ogre if he had laid hold of any one who could brew a hundred lasts of malt at one strike ?
" no ," said the ogre , " i can ' t hear of any one who can do it .
"" well ," she said , " a while ago , there was a chap in here who said he could do it .
"" just like you , with your wisdom !"
said the ogre ; " why did you let him go away then , when you knew he was the very man i wanted ?
"" well , then , i didn ' t let him go ," said the princess ; " but father ' s temper is a little hot , so i hid him away in the side - room yonder ; but if father hasn ' t hit upon any one , here he is .
"" well ," said the ogre , " let him come in then .
" so shortshanks came in , and the ogre asked him if it were true that he could brew a hundred lasts of malt at a strike .
" yes , it is ," said shortshanks ."
' twas good luck then to lay hands on you ," said the ogre , " and now fall to work this minute ; but heaven help you if you don ' t brew the ale strong enough .
"" oh ," said shortshanks , " never fear , it shall be stinging stuff ;" and with that he began to brew without more fuss , but all at once he cried out ,—" i must have more of you ogres to help in the brewing for these i have got ain ' t half strong enough .
" well , he got more — so many , that there was a whole swarm of them , and then the brewing went on bravely .
now when the sweet - wort was ready , they were all eager to taste it , you may guess ; first of all the ogre , and then all his kith and kin .
but shortshanks had brewed the wort so strong that they all fell down dead , one after another , like so many flies , as soon as they had tasted it .
at last there wasn ' t one of them left alive but one vile old hag , who lay bed - ridden in the chimney corner .
" oh , you poor old wretch !"
said shortshanks , " you may just as well taste the wort along with the rest .
" so he went and scooped up a little from the bottom of the copper in a scoop , and gave her a drink , and so he was rid of the whole pack of them . as he stood there and looked about him , he cast his eye on a great chest , so he took it and filled it with gold and silver ; then he tied the cable round himself and the princess and the chest , and gave it a good tug , and his men pulled them all up , safe and sound .
as soon as ever shortshanks was well up , he said to the ship ,—" off and away , over fresh water and salt water , high hill and deep dale , and don ' t stop till you come to the king ' s palace ;" and straightway the ship held on her course , so that the yellow billows foamed round her .
when the people in the palace saw the ship sailing up , they were not slow in meeting them with songs and music , welcoming shortshanks with great joy ; but the gladdest of all was the king , who had now got his other daughter back again . but now shortshanks was rather down - hearted , for you must know that both the princesses wanted to have him , and he would have no other than the one he had first saved , and she was the youngest .
so he walked up and down , and thought and thought what he should do to get her , and yet do something to please her sister .
well , one day as he was turning the thing over in his mind , it struck him if he only had his brother king sturdy , who was so like him that no one could tell the one from the other , he would give up to him the other princess and half the kingdom , for he thought one - half was quite enough . well , as soon as ever this came into his mind , he went outside the palace and called on king sturdy , but no one came .
so he called a second time a little louder , but still no one came .
then he called out the third time " king sturdy !"
with all his might , and there stood his brother before him .
" didn ' t i say !"
he said to shortshanks , " didn ' t i say you were not to call me except in your utmost need !
and here there is not so much as a gnat to do you any harm ," and with that he gave him such a box on the ear that shortshanks tumbled head over heels on the grass .
" now shame on you to hit so hard !"
said shortshanks .
" first of all i won a princess and half the kingdom , and then i won another princess and the other half of the kingdom ; and now i ' m thinking to give you one of the princesses and half the kingdom .
is there any rhyme or reason in giving me such a box on the ear ?
" when king sturdy heard that , he begged his brother to forgive him , and they were soon as good friends as ever again .
" now ," said shortshanks , " you know , we are so much alike that no one can tell the one from the other ; so just change clothes with me and go into the palace ; then the princesses will think it is i that am coming in , and the one that kisses you first you shall have for your wife , and i will have the other for mine .
" and he said this because he knew well enough that the elder king ' s daughter was the stronger , and so he could very well guess how things would go .
as for king sturdy , he was willing enough , so he changed clothes with his brother and went into the palace .
but when he came into the princesses ' bower they thought it was shortshanks , and both ran up to him to kiss him ; but the elder , who was stronger and bigger , pushed her sister on one side , and threw her arms round king sturdy ' s neck , and gave him a kiss ; and so he got her for his wife , and shortshanks got the younger princess .
then they made ready for the wedding , and you may fancy what a grand one it was , when i tell you that the fame of it was noised abroad over seven kingdoms .
