once on a time there was a man whose name was gudbrand ; he had a farm which lay far , far away , upon a hill - side , and so they called him gudbrand on the hill - side . now , you must know this man and his goodwife lived so happily together , and understood one another so well , that all the husband did the wife thought so well done , there was nothing like it in the world , and she was always glad whatever he turned his hand to .
the farm was their own land , and they had a hundred dollars lying at the bottom of their chest , and two cows tethered up in a stall in their farmyard . so one day his wife said to gudbrand ,—" do you know , dear , i think we ought to take one of our cows into town and sell it ; that ' s what i think ; for then we shall have some money in hand , and such well to - do people as we ought to have ready money like the rest of the world .
as for the hundred dollars at the bottom of the chest yonder , we can ' t make a hole in them , and i ' m sure i don ' t know what we want with more than one cow .
besides , we shall gain a little in another way , for then i shall get off with only looking after one cow , instead of having , as now , to feed and litter and water two .
" well , gudbrand thought his wife talked right good sense , so he set off at once with the cow on his way to town to sell her ; but when he got to the town , there was no one who would buy his cow .
" well , well !
never mind ," said gudbrand , " at the worst , i can only go back home again with my cow .
i ' ve both stable and tether for her , i should think , and the road is no farther out than in ;" and with that he began to toddle home with his cow . but when he had gone a bit of the way , a man met him who had a horse to sell , so gudbrand thought ' twas better to have a horse than a cow , so he swopped with the man .
a little farther on he met a man walking along and driving a fat pig before him , and he thought it better to have a fat pig than a horse , so he swopped with the man .
after that he went a little farther , and a man met him with a goat ; so he thought it better to have a goat than a pig , and he swopped with the man that owned the goat .
then he went on a good bit till he met a man who had a sheep , and he swopped with him too , for he thought it always better to have a sheep than a goat .
after a while he met a man with a goose , and he swopped away the sheep for the goose ; and when he had walked a long , long time , he met a man with a cock , and he swopped with him , for he thought in this wise , " ' tis surely better to have a cock than a goose ."
then he went on till the day was far spent , and he began to get very hungry , so he sold the cock for a shilling , and bought food with the money , for , thought gudbrand on the hill - side , " ' tis always better to save one ' s life than to have a cock .
" after that he went on home till he reached his nearest neighbour ' s house , where he turned in .
" well ," said the owner of the house , " how did things go with you in town ?
"" rather so so ," said gudbrand .
" i can ' t praise my luck , nor do i blame it either ," and with that he told the whole story from first to last ." ah !"
said his friend , " you ' ll get nicely called over the coals , that one can see , when you get home to your wife .
heaven help you , i wouldn ' t stand in your shoes for something .
"" well ," said gudbrand on the hill - side , " i think things might have gone much worse with me ; but now , whether i have done wrong or not , i have so kind a good - wife , she never has a word to say against anything that i do ."" oh !"
answered his neighbour , " i hear what you say , but i don ' t believe it for all that .
"" shall we lay a bet upon it ?"
asked gudbrand on the hill - side .
" i have a hundred dollars at the bottom of my chest at home ; will you lay as many against them ?
" yes , the friend was ready to bet ; so gudbrand stayed there till evening , when it began to get dark , and then they went together to his house , and the neighbour was to stand outside the door and listen , while the man went in to see his wife .
" good evening !"
said gudbrand on the hill - side .
" good evening !"
said the goodwife .
" oh , is that you ?
now god be praised ." yes !
it was he .
so the wife asked how things had gone with him in town ." oh !
only so so ," answered gudbrand ; " not much to brag of .
when i got to the town there was no one who would buy the cow , so you must know i swopped it away for a horse .
"" for a horse ," said his wife ; " well , that is good of you ; thanks with all my heart .
we are so well to do that we may drive to church , just as well as other people ; and if we choose to keep a horse we have a right to get one , i should think .
so run out , child , and put up the horse ."" ah !"
said gudbrand , " but you see i ' ve not got the horse after all ; for when i got a bit farther on the road i swopped it away for a pig .
"" think of that , now !"
said the wife ; " you did just as i should have done myself ; a thousand thanks !
now i can have a bit of bacon in the house to set before people when they come to see me , that i can .
what do we want with a horse ?
people would only say we had got so proud that we couldn ' t walk to church .
go out , child , and put up the pig in the stye .
"" but i ' ve not got the pig either ," said gudbrand ; " for when i got a little farther on i swopped it away for a milch goat .
"" bless us !"
cried his wife , " how well you manage everything !
now i think it over , what should i do with a pig ?
people would only point at us and say , ' yonder they eat up all they have got .'
no !
now i have got a goat , and i shall have milk and cheese , and keep the goat too .
run out , child , and put up the goat .
"" nay , but i haven ' t got the goat either ," said gudbrand , " for a little farther on i swopped it away , and got a fine sheep instead .
"" you don ' t say so !"
cried his wife ; " why , you do everything to please me , just as if i had been with you ; what do we want with a goat !
if i had it i should lose half my time in climbing up the hills to get it down .
no !
if i have a sheep , i shall have both wool and clothing , and fresh meat in the house .
run out , child , and put up the sheep .
"" but i haven ' t got the sheep any more than the rest ," said gudbrand ; " for when i had gone a bit farther i swopped it away for a goose .
"" thank you !
thank you !
with all my heart ," cried his wife ; " what should i do with a sheep ?
i have no spinning - wheel , nor carding - comb , nor should i care to worry myself with cutting , and shaping , and sewing clothes .
we can buy clothes now , as we have always done ; and now i shall have roast goose , which i have longed for so often ; and , besides , down to stuff my little pillow with .
run out , child , and put up the goose ."" ah !"
said gudbrand , " but i haven ' t the goose either ; for when i had gone a bit farther i swopped it away for a cock .
"" dear me !"
cried his wife , " how you think of everything !
just as i should have done myself .
a cock !
think of that !
why it ' s as good as an eight - day clock , for every morning the cock crows at four o ' clock , and we shall be able to stir our stumps in good time .
what should we do with a goose ?
i don ' t know how to cook it ; and as for my pillow , i can stuff it with cotton - grass .
run out , child , and put up the cock .
"" but after all i haven ' t got the cock ," said gudbrand ; " for when i had gone a bit farther , i got as hungry as a hunter , so i was forced to sell the cock for a shilling , for fear i should starve .
"" now , god be praised that you did so !"
cried his wife ; " whatever you do , you do it always just after my own heart .
what should we do with the cock ?
we are our own masters , i should think , and can lie a - bed in the morning , as long as we like .
heaven be thanked that i have got you safe back again ; you who do everything so well that i want neither cock nor goose ; neither pigs nor kine .
" then gudbrand opened the door and said ,—" well , what do you say now ?
have i won the hundred dollars ?"
and his neighbour was forced to allow that he had .
