once on a time there was a man , and he had a wife .
now this couple wanted to sow their fields , but they had neither seed - corn nor money to buy it with .
but they had a cow , and the man was to drive it into town and sell it , to get money to buy corn for seed .
but when it came to the pinch , the wife dared not let her husband start , for fear he should spend the money in drink , so she set off herself with the cow , and took besides a hen with her . close by the town she met a butcher , who asked ,—" will you sell that cow , goody ?
"" yes , that i will ," she answered .
" well , what do you want for her ?"" oh !
i must have five shillings for the cow , but you shall have the hen for ten pound .
"" very good !"
said the man ; " i don ' t want the hen , and you ' ll soon get it off your hands in the town ; but i ' ll give you five shillings for the cow .
" well , she sold her cow for five shillings , but there was no one in the town who would give ten pound for a lean tough old hen , so she went back to the butcher , and said ,—" do all i can , i can ' t get rid of this hen , master !
you must take it too , as you took the cow .
"" well ," said the butcher , " come along and we ' ll see about it ."
then he treated her both with meat and drink , and gave her so much brandy that she lost her head , and didn ' t know what she was about , and fell fast asleep .
but while she slept , the butcher took and dipped her into a tar - barrel , and then laid her down on a heap of feathers ; and when she woke up she was feathered all over , and began to wonder what had befallen her .
" is it me , or is it not me ?
no , it can never be me ; it must be some great strange bird .
but what shall i do to find out whether it is me or not .
oh !
i know how i shall be able to tell whether it is me ; if the calves come and lick me , and our dog tray doesn ' t bark at me when i get home , then it must be me and no one else .
" now , tray , her dog , had scarce set his eyes on the strange monster which came through the gate , than he set up such a barking , one would have thought all the rogues and robbers in the world were in the yard ." ah !
deary me !"
said she , " i thought so ; it can ' t be me surely ."
so she went to the straw - yard , and the calves wouldn ' t lick her , when they snuffed in the strong smell of tar .
" no , no !"
she said , " it can ' t be me ; it must be some strange outlandish bird .
" so she crept up on the roof of the safe and began to flap her arms , as if they had been wings , and was just going to fly off . when her husband saw all this , out he came with his rifle , and began to take aim at her ." oh !"
cried his wife , " don ' t shoot , don ' t shoot !
it is only me !
"" if it ' s you ," said her husband , " don ' t stand up there like a goat on a house - top , but come down and let me hear what you have to say for yourself .
" so she crawled down again , but she hadn ' t a shilling to show , for the crown she had got from the butcher she had thrown away in her drunkenness .
when her husband heard her story , he said " you ' re only twice as silly as you were before ," and he got so angry that he made up his mind to go away from her altogether , and never to come back till he had found three other goodies as silly as his own . so he toddled off , and when he had walked a little way he saw a goody , who was running in and out of a newly - built wooden cottage with an empty sieve , and every time she ran in she threw her apron over the sieve , just as if she had something in it , and when she got in she turned it up - side down on the floor .
" why , goody !"
he asked , " what are you doing ?
"" oh ," she answered , " i ' m only carrying in a little sun but i don ' t know how it is , when i ' m outside i have the sun in my sieve , but when i get inside , somehow or other i ' ve thrown it away .
but in my old cottage i had plenty of sun , though i never carried in the least bit .
i only wish i knew some one who would bring the sun inside ; i ' d give him three hundred dollars and welcome .
"" have you got an axe ?"
asked the man .
" if you have , i ' ll soon bring the sun inside .
" so he got an axe and cut windows in the cottage , for the carpenters had forgotten them ; then the sun shone in , and he got his three hundred dollars .
" that was one of them ," said the man to himself , as he went on his way . after a while he passed by a house , out of which came an awful screaming and bellowing ; so he turned in and saw a goody , who was hard at work banging her husband across the head with a beetle , and over his head she had drawn a shirt without any slit for the neck .
" why , goody !"
he asked , " will you beat your husband to death ?
"" no ," she said , " i only must have a hole in this shirt for his neck to come through .
" all the while the husband kept on screaming and calling out ,—" heaven help and comfort all who try on new shirts !
if any one would teach my goody another way of making a slit for the neck in my new shirts i ' d give him three hundred dollars down , and welcome .
"" i ' ll do it in the twinkling of an eye ," said the man , " if you ' ll only give me a pair of scissors .
" so he got a pair of scissors , and snipped a hole in the the neck , and went off with his three hundred dollars .
" that was another of them ," he said to himself , as he walked along . last of all , he came to a farm , where he made up his mind to rest a bit .
so when he went in , the mistress asked him ,—" whence do you come , master ?"" oh !"
said he , " i come from paradise place ," for that was the name of his farm .
" from paradise place !"
she cried , " you don ' t say so !
why , then , you must know my second husband peter , who is dead and gone , god rest his soul !
" for you must know this goody had been married three times , and as her first and last husbands had been bad , she had made up her mind that the second only was gone to heaven ." oh !
yes ," said the man ; " i know him very well .
"" well ," asked the goody , " how do things go with him , poor dear soul ?
"" only middling ," was the answer ; " he goes about begging from house to house , and has neither food nor a rag to his back .
as for money , he hasn ' t a sixpence to bless himself with .
"" mercy on me !"
cried out the goody ; " he never ought to go about such a figure when he left so much behind him .
why , there ' s a whole cupboard full of old clothes upstairs which belonged to him , besides a great chest full of money yonder .
now , if you will take them with you , you shall have a horse and cart to carry them .
as for the horse , he can keep it , and sit on the cart , and drive about from house to house , and then he needn ' t trudge on foot .
" so the man got a whole cart - load of clothes , and a chest full of shining dollars , and as much meat and drink as he would ; and when he had got all he wanted , he jumped into the cart and drove off .
" that was the third ," he said to himself , as he went along . now this goody ' s third husband was a little way off in a field ploughing , and when he saw a strange man driving off from the farm with his horse and cart , he went home and asked his wife who that was that had just started with the black horse .
" oh , do you mean him ?"
said the goody ; " why , that was a man from paradise , who said that peter , my dear second husband , who is dead and gone , is in a sad plight , and that he goes from house to house begging , and has neither clothes nor money ; so i just sent him all those old clothes he left behind him , and the old money box with the dollars in it .
" the man saw how the land lay in a trice , so he saddled his horse and rode off from the farm at full gallop .
it wasn ' t long before he was close behind the man who sat and drove the cart ; but when the latter saw this he drove the cart into a thicket by the side of the road , pulled out a handful of hair from the horse ' s tail , jumped up on a little rise in the wood , where he tied the hair fast to a birch , and then lay down under it , and began to peer and stare up at the sky .
" well , well , if i ever !"
he said , as peter the third came riding up .
" no !
i never saw the like of this in all my born days !
" then peter stood and looked at him for some time , wondering what had come over him ; but at last he asked ,—" what do you lie there staring at ?
"" no ," kept on the man , " i never did see anything like it !— here is a man going straight up to heaven on a black horse , and here you see his horse ' s tail still hanging in this birch ; and yonder up in the sky you see the black horse .
" peter looked first at the man , and then at the sky , and said —" i see nothing but the horse hair in the birch ; that ' s all i see .
"" of course you can ' t where you stand ," said the man ; but just come and lie down here , and stare straight up , and mind you don ' t take your eyes off the sky ; and then you shall see what you shall see .
" but while peter the third lay and stared up at the sky till his eyes filled with tears , the man from paradise place took his horse and jumped on its back , and rode off both with it and the cart and horse . when the hoofs thundered along the road , peter the third jumped up , but he was so taken aback when he found the man had gone off with his horse , that he hadn ' t the sense to run after him till it was too late . he was rather down in the mouth when he got home to his goody ; but when she asked him what he had done with the horse , he said ,—" i gave it to the man too for peter the second , for i thought it wasn ' t right he should sit in a cart and scramble about from house to house ; so now he can sell the cart and buy himself a coach to drive about in .
"" thank you heartily !"
said his wife ; " i never thought you could be so kind .
" well , when the man reached home , who had got the six hundred dollars and the cart - load of clothes and money , he saw that all his fields were ploughed and sown , and the first thing he asked his wife was , where she had got the seed - corn from .
" oh ," she said , " i have always heard that what a man sows he shall reap , so i sowed the salt which our friends the north country men laid up here with us , and if we only have rain i fancy it will come up nicely .
"" silly you are ," said her husband , " and silly you will be so long as you live ; but that is all one now , for the rest are not a bit wiser than you .
there is not a pin to choose between you ."
