once on a time there was a fisherman who lived close by a palace , and fished for the king ' s table .
one day when he was out fishing he just caught nothing .
do what he would — however he tried with bait and angle — there was never a sprat on his hook .
but when the day was far spent a head bobbed up out of the water , and said ,—" if i may have what your wife bears under her girdle you shall catch fish enough .
" so the man answered boldly , " yes ;" for he did not know that his wife was going to have a child .
after that , as was like enough , he caught plenty of fish of all kinds .
but when he got home at night and told his story , how he had got all that fish , his wife fell a - weeping and moaning , and was beside herself for the promise which her husband had made , for she said , " i bear a babe under my girdle .
" well , the story soon spread , and came up to the castle ; and when the king heard the woman ' s grief and its cause , he sent down to say he would take care of the child , and see if he couldn ' t save it . so the months went on and on , and when her time came the fisher ' s wife had a boy ; so the king took it at once , and brought it up as his own son , until the lad grew up .
then he begged leave one day to go out fishing with his father ; he had such a mind to go , he said .
at first the king wouldn ' t hear of it , but at last the lad had his way , and went .
so he and his father were out the whole day , and all went right and well till they landed at night .
then the lad remembered he had left his handkerchief , and went to look for it ; but as soon as ever he got into the boat it began to move off with him at such speed that the water roared under the bow , and all the lad could do in rowing against it with the oars was no use ; so he went and went the whole night , and at last he came to a white strand , far far away . there he went ashore , and when he had walked about a bit , an old , old man met him , with a long white beard .
" what ' s the name of this land ?"
asked the lad .
" whiteland ," said the man , who went on to ask the lad whence he came , and what he was going to do .
so the lad told him all .
" ay , ay !"
said the man ; now when you have walked a little farther along the strand here , you ' ll come to three princesses , whom you will see standing in the earth up to their necks , with only their heads out .
then the first — she is the eldest — will call out and beg you so prettily to come and help her ; and the second will do the same ; to neither of these shall you go ; make haste past them , as if you neither saw nor heard anything .
but the third you shall go to , and do what she asks .
if you do this you ' ll have good luck , that ' s all .
" when the lad came to the first princess she called out to him and begged him so prettily to come to her , but he passed on as though he saw her not .
in the same way he passed by the second ; but to the third he went straight up .
" if you ' ll do what i bid you ," she said , " you may have which of us you please .
"" yes ;" he was willing enough ; so she told him how three trolls had set them down in the earth there ; but before they had lived in the castle up among the trees .
" now ," she said , " you must go into that castle , and let the trolls whip you each one night for each of us .
if you can bear that you ' ll set us free .
" well , the lad said he was ready to try .
" when you go in ," the princess went on to say , " you ' ll see two lions standing at the gate ; but if you ' ll only go right in the middle between them they ' ll do you no harm .
then go straight on into a little dark room , and make your bed .
then the troll will come to whip you ; but if you take the flask which hangs on the wall , and rub yourself with the ointment that ' s in it , wherever his lash falls you ' ll be as sound as ever .
then grasp the sword that hangs by the side of the flask and strike the troll dead .
" yes , he did as the princess told him ; he passed in the midst between the lions , as if he hadn ' t seen them , and went straight into the little room , and there he lay down to sleep .
the first night there came a troll with three heads and three rods , and whipped the lad soundly ; but he stood it till the troll was done ; then he took the flask and rubbed himself , and grasped the sword and slew the troll . so , when he went out next morning , the princesses stood out of the earth up to their waists . the next night ' twas the same story over again , only this time the troll had six heads and six rods , and he whipped him far worse than the first ; but when he went out next morning the princesses stood out of the earth as far as the knee . the third night there came a troll that had nine heads and nine rods , and he whipped and flogged the lad so long that he fainted away ; then the troll took him up and dashed him against the wall ; but the shock brought down the flask , which fell on the lad , burst and spilled the ointment all over him , and so he became as strong and sound as ever again .
then he wasn ' t slow ; he grasped the sword and slew the troll ; and next morning when he went out of the castle the princesses stood before him with all their bodies out of the earth .
so he took the youngest for his queen , and lived well and happily with her for some time . at last he began to long to go home for a little to see his parents .
his queen did not like this ; but at last his heart was so set on it , and he longed and longed so much , there was no holding him back , so she said ,—" one thing you must promise me .
this .— only to do what your father begs you to do , and not what your mother wishes ;" and that he promised . then she gave him a ring , which was of that kind that any one who wore it might wish two wishes .
so he wished himself home , and when he got home his parents could not wonder enough what a grand man their son had become . now , when he had been at home some days , his mother wished him to go up to the palace and show the king what a fine fellow he had come to be .
but his father said ,—" no !
don ' t let him do that ; if he does , we shan ' t have any more joy of him this time .
" but it was no good , the mother begged and prayed so long , that at last he went .
so when he got up to the palace , he was far braver , both in clothes and array , than the other king , who didn ' t quite like this , and at last he said ,—" all very fine ; but here you can see my queen , what like she is , but i can ' t see yours , that i can ' t .
do you know i scarce think she ' s so good - looking as mine .
"" would to heaven ," said the young king , " she were standing here , then you ' d see what she was like ."
and that instant there she stood before them . but she was very woeful , and said to him ,—" why did you not mind what i told you ; and why did you not listen to what your father said ?
now , i must away home , and as for you , you have had both your wishes .
" with that she knitted a ring among his hair with her name on it , and wished herself home , and was off . then the young king was cut to the heart , and went , day out day in , thinking and thinking how he should get back to his queen .
" i ' ll just try ," he thought , " if i can ' t learn where whiteland lies ;" and so he went out into the world to ask .
so when he had gone a good way he came to a high hill , and there he met one who was lord over all the beasts of the wood , for they all came home to him when he blew his horn ; so the king asked if he knew where whiteland was .
" no , i don ' t ," said he , " but i ' ll ask my beasts ."
then he blew his horn and called them , and asked if any of them knew where whiteland lay ; but there was no beast that knew . so the man gave him a pair of snow - shoes .
" when you get on these ," he said , " you ' ll come to my brother , who lives hundreds of miles off ; he is lord over all the birds of the air .
ask him .
when you reach his house , just turn the shoes , so that the toes point this way , and they ' ll come home of themselves ."
so when the king reached the house he turned the shoes as the lord of the beasts had said , and away they went home of themselves . so he asked again after whiteland , and the man called all the birds with a blast of his horn , and asked if any of them knew where whiteland lay ; but none of the birds knew .
now , long , long after the rest of the birds , came an old eagle , which had been away ten round years , but he couldn ' t tell any more than the rest ." well !
well !"
said the man , " i ' ll lend you a pair of snow - shoes , and when you get them on they ' ll carry you to my brother , who lives hundreds of miles off ; he ' s lord of all the fish in the sea ; you ' d better ask him .
but don ' t forget to turn the toes of the shoes this way .
" the king was full of thanks , got on the shoes , and when he came to the man who was lord over the fish of the sea , he turned the toes round , and so off they went home like the other pair .
after that , he asked again after whiteland . so the man called the fish with a blast , but no fish could tell where it lay .
at last came an old pike , which they had great work to call home , he was such a way off .
so when they asked him he said ,—" know it !
i should think i did .
i ' ve been cook there ten years , and to - morrow i ' m going there again ; for now , the queen of whiteland , whose king is away , is going to wed another husband ."" well !"
said the man , " as this is so , i ' ll give you a bit of advice .
hereabouts , on a moor , stand three brothers , and here they have stood these hundred years , fighting about a hat , a cloak , and a pair of boots .
if any one has these three things he can make himself invisible , and wish himself anywhere he pleases .
you can tell them you wish to try the things , and after that you ' ll pass judgment between them , whose they shall be .
" yes , the king thanked the man , and went and did as he told him .
" what ' s all this ?"
he said to the brothers .
" why do you stand here fighting for ever and a day ?
just let me try these things , and i ' ll give judgment whose they shall be .
" they were very willing to do this ; but as soon as he had got the hat , cloak , and boots , he said ,—" when we meet next time i ' ll tell you my judgment ," and with these words he wished himself away . so as he went along , up in the air , he came up with the north wind .
" whither away ?"
roared the north wind .
" to whiteland ," said the king ; and then he told him all that had befallen him .
" ah ," said the north wind , " you go faster than i — you do ; for you can go straight , while i have to puff and blow round every turn and corner .
but when you get there , just place yourself on the stairs by the side of the door , and then i ' ll come storming in , as though i were going to blow down the whole castle .
and then when the prince , who is to have your queen , comes out to see what ' s the matter , just you take him by the collar and pitch him out of doors ; then i ' ll look after him , and see if i can ' t carry him off .
" well — the king did as the north wind said .
he took his stand on the stairs , and when the north wind came , storming and roaring , and took hold of the castle wall , so that it shook again , the prince came out to see what was the matter .
but as soon as ever he came , the king caught him by the collar and pitched him out of doors , and then the north wind caught him up and carried him off .
so when there was an end of him , the king went into the castle , and at first his queen didn ' t know him , he was so wan and thin , through wandering so far and being so woeful ; but when he showed her the ring , she was as glad as glad could be ; and so the rightful wedding was held and the fame of it spread far and wide .
