once on a time a poor couple lived far , far away in a great wood .
the wife was brought to bed , and had a pretty girl , but they were so poor they did not know how to get the babe christened , for they had no money to pay the parson ' s fees .
so one day the father went out to see if he could find any one who was willing to stand for the child and pay the fees ; but though he walked about the whole day from one house to another , and though all said they were willing enough to stand , no one thought himself bound to pay the fees .
now , when he was going home again , a lovely lady met him , dressed so fine , and who looked so thoroughly good and kind ; she offered to get the babe christened , but after that , she said , she must keep it for her own .
the husband answered , he must first ask his wife what she wished to do ; but when he got home and told his story , the wife said , right out , " no !
" next day the man went out again , but no one would stand if they had to pay the fees ; and though he begged and prayed , he could get no help .
and again , as he went home towards evening , the same lovely lady met him , who looked so sweet and good , and she made him the same offer .
so he told his wife again how he had fared , and this time , she said , if he couldn ' t get any one to stand for his babe next day , they must just let the lady have her way , since she seemed so kind and good . the third day the man went about , but he couldn ' t get any one to stand ; and so when , towards evening , he met the kind lady again , he gave his word she should have the babe if she would only get it christened at the font .
so next morning she came to the place where the man lived , followed by two men to stand godfathers , took the babe and carried it to church , and there it was christened .
after that she took it to her own house , and there the little girl lived with her several years , and her foster - mother was always kind and friendly to her . now when the lassie had grown to be big enough to know right and wrong , her foster - mother got ready to go on a journey .
" you have my leave ," she said , " to go all over the house , except those rooms which i show you ;" and when she had said that , away she went . but the lassie could not forbear just to open one of the doors a little bit , when pop !
out flew a star . when her foster - mother came back , she was very vexed to find that the star had flown out , and she got very angry with her foster - daughter , and threatened to send her away ; but the child cried and begged so hard that she got leave to stay . now , after a while , the foster - mother had to go on another journey ; and before she went she forbade the lassie to go into those two rooms into which she had never been .
she promised to beware ; but when she was left alone she began to think and to wonder what there could be in the second room , and at last she could not help setting the door a little ajar , just to peep in , when — pop !
out flew the moon . when her foster - mother came home and found the moon let out , she was very downcast , and said to the lassie she must go away , she could not stay with her any longer .
but the lassie wept so bitterly , and prayed so heartily for forgiveness , that this time too she got leave to stay . some time after , the foster - mother had to go away again , and she charged the lassie , who by this time was half grown up , most earnestly that she mustn ' t try to go into , or to peep into , the third room .
but when her foster - mother had been gone some time , and the lassie was weary of walking about alone , all at once she thought , " dear me , what fun it would be just to peep a little into that third room ."
then she thought she mustn ' t do it for her foster - mother ' s sake ; but when the bad thought came the second time she could hold out no longer ; come what might , she must and would look into the room ; so she just opened the door a tiny bit , when — pop !
out flew the sun . but when her foster - mother came back and saw that the sun had flown away , she was cut to the heart , and said , " now , there was no help for it , the lassie must and should go away ; she couldn ' t hear of her staying any longer ."
now the lassie cried her eyes out , and begged and prayed so prettily ; but it was all no good .
" nay , but i must punish you !"
said her foster - mother ; " but you may have your choice , either to be the loveliest woman in the world , and not to be able to speak , or to keep your speech and be the ugliest of all women ; but away from me you must go .
" and the lassie said , " i would sooner be lovely ."
so she became all at once wondrous fair , but from that day forth she was dumb . so when she went away from her foster - mother she walked and wandered through a great , great wood ; but the farther she went , the farther off the end seemed to be .
so , when the evening came on , she clomb up into a tall tree , which grew over a spring , and there she made herself up to sleep that night .
close by lay a castle , and from that castle came early every morning a maid to draw water , to make the prince ' s tea , from the spring over which the lassie was sitting .
so the maid looked down into the spring , saw the lovely face in the water , and thought it was her own ; then she flung away the pitcher , and ran home ; and when she got there , she tossed up her head , and said , " if i ' m so pretty i ' m far too good to go and fetch water .
" so another maid had to go for the water , but the same thing happened to her ; she went back and said she was far too pretty and too good to fetch water from the spring for the prince .
then the prince went himself , for he had a mind to see what all this could mean .
so , when he reached the spring , he too saw the image in the water ; but he looked up at once , and became aware of the lovely lassie who sat there up in the tree .
then he coaxed her down and took her home ; and at last made up his mind to have her for his queen , because she was so lovely ; but his mother , who was still alive , was against it .
" she can ' t speak ," she said , " and maybe she ' s a wicked witch .
" but the prince could not be content till he got her .
so after they had lived together a while , the lassie was to have a child , and when the child came to be born the prince set a strong watch round her ; but at the birth one and all fell into a deep sleep , and her foster - mother came , cut the babe on its little finger , and smeared the queen ' s mouth with the blood ; and said ,—" now you shall be as grieved as i was when you let out the star ;" and with these words she carried off the babe . but when those who were on the watch woke , they thought the queen had eaten her own child , and the old queen was all for burning her alive , but the prince was so fond of her that at last he begged her off , but he had hard work to set her free . so the next time the young queen was to have a child , twice as strong a watch was set as the first time , but the same thing happened over again , only this time her foster - mother said ,—" now you shall be as grieved as i was when you let the moon out .
" and the queen begged and prayed , and wept ; for when her foster - mother was there , she could speak — but it was all no good .
and now the old queen said she must be burnt , but the prince found means to beg her off .
but when the third child was to be born , a watch was set three times as strong as the first , but just the same thing happened .
her foster - mother came while the watch slept , took the babe , and cut its little finger , and smeared the queen ' s mouth with the blood , telling her now she should be as grieved as she had been when the lassie let out the sun . and now the prince could not save her any longer .
she must and should be burnt .
but just as they were leading her to the stake , all at once they saw her foster - mother , who came with all three children — two she led by the hand , and the third she had on her arm ; and so she went up to the young queen and said ,—" here are your children ; now you shall have them again .
i am the virgin mary , and so grieved as you have been , so grieved was i when you let out sun and moon , and star .
now you have been punished for what you did , and henceforth you shall have your speech .
" how glad the queen and prince now were all may easily think , but no one can tell .
after that they were always happy ; and from that day even the prince ' s mother was very fond of the young queen .
