once on a time there was a poor man who lived in a hut far away in the wood , and got his living by shooting .
he had an only daughter , who was very pretty , and as she had lost her mother when she was a child , and was now half grown up , she said she would go out into the world and earn her bread .
" well , lassie !"
said the father , " true enough you have learnt nothing here but how to pluck birds and roast them , but still you may as well try to earn your bread ."
so the girl went off to seek a place , and when she had gone a little while , she came to a palace .
there she stayed and got a place , and the queen liked her so well that all the other maids got envious of her .
so they made up their minds to tell the queen how the lassie said she was good to spin a pound of flax in four - and - twenty hours , for you must know the queen was a great housewife , and thought much of good work .
" have you said this ?
then you shall do it ," said the queen ; " but you may have a little longer time if you choose .
" now , the poor lassie dared not say she had never spun in all her life , but she only begged for a room to herself .
that she got , and the wheel and the flax were brought up to her .
there she sat sad and weeping , and knew not how to help herself .
she pulled the wheel this way and that , and twisted and turned it about , but she made a poor hand of it , for she had never even seen a spinning - wheel in her life . but all at once , as she sat there , in came an old woman to her .
" what ails you , child ?"
she said ." ah !"
said the lassie , with a deep sigh , " it ' s no good to tell you , for you ' ll never be able to help me .
"" who knows ?"
said the old wife .
" maybe i know how to help you after all .
" well , thought the lassie to herself , i may as well tell her , and so she told her how her fellow - servants had given out that she was good to spin a pound of flax in four - and - twenty hours .
" and here am i , wretch that i am , shut up to spin all that heap in a day and a night , when i have never ever seen a spinning - wheel in all my born days .
"" well never mind , child ," said the old woman , " if you ' ll call me aunt on the happiest day of your life , i ' ll spin this flax for you , and so you may just go away and lie down to sleep .
" yes , the lassie was willing enough , and off she went and lay down to sleep . next morning when she awoke , there lay all the flax spun on the table , and that so clean and fine , no one had ever seen such even and pretty yarn .
the queen was very glad to get such nice yarn , and she set greater store by the lassie than ever .
but the rest were still more envious , and agreed to tell the queen how the lassie had said she was good to weave the yarn she had spun in four - and - twenty hours .
so the queen said again , as she had said it she must do it ; but if she couldn ' t quite finish it in four - and - twenty hours , she wouldn ' t be too hard upon her , she might have a little more time .
this time , too , the lassie dared not say no , but begged for a room to herself , and then she would try .
there she sat again , sobbing and crying , and not knowing which way to turn , when another old woman came in and asked ,—" what ails you , child ?
" at first the lassie wouldn ' t say , but at last she told her the whole story of her grief .
" well , well !"
said the old wife , " never mind .
if you ' ll call me aunt on the happiest day of your life , i ' ll weave this yarn for you , and so you may just be off , and lie down to sleep ."
yes , the lassie was willing enough ; so she went away and lay down to sleep .
when she awoke , there lay the piece of linen on the table , woven so neat and close , no woof could be better .
so the lassie took the piece and ran down to the queen , who was very glad to get such beautiful linen , and set greater store than ever by the lassie .
but as for the others , they grew still more bitter against her , and thought of nothing but how to find out something to tell about her . at last they told the queen the lassie had said she was good to make up the piece of linen into shirts in four - and - twenty hours .
well , all happened as before ; the lassie dared not say she couldn ' t sew ; so she was shut up again in a room by herself , and there she sat in tears and grief .
but then another old wife came , who said she would sew the shirts for her if she would call her aunt on the happiest day of her life .
the lassie was only too glad to do this , and then she did as the old wife told her , and went and lay down to sleep . next morning when she woke she found the piece of linen made up into shirts , which lay on the table — and such beautiful work no one had ever set eyes on ; and more than that , the shirts were all marked and ready for wear .
so , when the queen saw the work , she was so glad at the way in which it was sewn , that she clapped her hands , and said ,—" such sewing i never had , nor even saw , in all my born days ;" and after that she was as fond of the lassie as of her own children ; and she said to her ,—" now , if you like to have the prince for your husband , you shall have him ; for you will never need to hire work - women .
you can sew , and spin , and weave all yourself .
" so as the lassie was pretty , and the prince was glad to have her , the wedding soon came on .
but just as the prince was going to sit down with the bride to the bridal feast , in came an ugly old hag with a long nose — i ' m sure it was three ells long . so up got the bride and made a curtsey , and said ,—" good - day , auntie .
"" that auntie to my bride ?"
said the prince .
" yes , she was !
"" well , then , she ' d better sit down with us to the feast ," said the prince ; but to tell you the truth , both he and the rest thought she was a loathsome woman to have next you . but just then in came another ugly old hag .
she had a back so humped and broad , she had hard work to get through the door .
up jumped the bride in a trice , and greeted her with " good - day , auntie !
" and the prince asked again if that were his bride ' s aunt .
they both said , yes ; so the prince said , if that were so , she too had better sit down with them to the feast . but they had scarce taken their seats before another ugly old hag came in , with eyes as large as saucers , and so red and bleared , ' twas gruesome to look at her .
but up jumped the bride again , with her " good - day , auntie ," and her , too , the prince asked to sit down ; but i can ' t say he was very glad , for he thought to himself ,—" heaven shield me from such aunties as my bride has !"
so when he had sat a while , he could not keep his thoughts to himself any longer , but asked ,—" but how , in all the world can my bride , who is such a lovely lassie , have such loathsome mis - shapen aunts ?
"" i ' ll soon tell you how it is ," said the first .
" i was just as good - looking when i was her age ; but the reason why i ' ve got this long nose is , because i was always kept sitting , and poking , and nodding over my spinning , and so my nose got stretched and stretched , until it got as long as you now see it .
"" and i ," said the second , " ever since i was young , i have sat and scuttled backwards and forwards over my loom , and that ' s how my back has got so broad and humped as you now see it .
"" and i ," said the third , " ever since i was little , i have sat , and stared and sewn , and sewn and stared , night and day ; and that ' s why my eyes have got so ugly and red , and now there ' s no help for them .
"" so , so !"
said the prince , " ' twas lucky i came to know this ; for if folk can get so ugly and loathsome by all this , then my bride shall neither spin , nor weave , nor sew all her life long ."
