once on a time there was a man whom they called rich peter the pedlar , because he used to travel about with a pack , and got so much money that he became quite rich .
this rich peter had a daughter , whom he held so dear that all who came to woo her were sent about their business , for no one was good enough for her , he thought .
well , this went on and on , and at last no one came to woo her , and as years rolled on , peter began to be afraid that she would die an old maid .
" i wonder now ," he said to his wife , " why suitors no longer come to woo our lass , who is so rich .
' twould be odd if nobody cared to have her , for money she has , and more she shall have .
i think i ' d better just go off to the stargazers , and ask them whom she shall have , for not a soul comes to us now .
"" but how ," asked the wife , " can the stargazers answer that ?
"" can ' t they ?"
said peter ; " why !
they read all things in the stars .
" so he took with him a great bag of money , and set off to the stargazers , and asked them to be so good as to look at the stars , and tell him the husband his daughter was to have . well , the stargazers looked and looked , but they said they could see nothing about it .
but peter begged them to look better , and to tell him the truth ; he would pay them well for it .
so the stargazers looked better , and at last they said that his daughter ' s husband was to be the miller ' s son , who was only just born , down at the mill below rich peter ' s house .
then peter gave the stargazers a hundred dollars , and went home with the answer he had got . now , he thought it too good a joke that his daughter should wed one so newly born , and of such poor estate .
he said this to his wife , and added ,—" i wonder now if they would sell me the boy ; then i ' d soon put him out of the way ?
"" i daresay they would ," said his wife ; " you know they ' re very poor .
" so peter went down to the mill , and asked the miller ' s wife whether she would sell him her son ; she should get a heap of money for him ?" no !"
that she wouldn ' t ." well !"
said peter , " i ' m sure i can ' t see why you shouldn ' t ; you ' ve hard work enough as it is to keep hunger out of the house , and the boy won ' t make it easier , i think .
" but the mother was so proud of the boy she couldn ' t part with him .
so when the miller came home , peter said the same thing to him , and gave his word to pay six hundred dollars for the boy , so that they might buy themselves a farm of their own , and not have to grind other folks ' corn , and to starve when they ran short of water .
the miller thought it was a good bargain , and he talked over his wife ; and the end was , that rich peter got the boy .
the mother cried and sobbed , but peter comforted her by saying the boy should be well cared for ; only they had to promise never to ask after him , for he said he meant to send him far away to other lands , so that he might learn foreign tongues . so when peter the pedlar got home with the boy he sent for a carpenter , and had a little chest made , which was so tidy and neat , ' twas a joy to see .
this he made water - tight with pitch , put the miller ' s boy into it , locked it up , and threw it into the river , where the stream carried it away .
" now , i ' m rid of him ," thought peter the pedlar . but when the chest had floated ever so far down the stream , it came into the mill - head of another mill , and ran down and hampered the shaft of the wheel , and stopped it .
out came the miller to see what stopped the mill , found the chest , and took it up .
so when he came home to dinner to his wife , he said ,—" i wonder now whatever there can be inside this chest , which came floating down the mill - head and stopped our mill to - day ?
"" that we ' ll soon know ," said his wife ; " see , there ' s the key in the lock , just turn it .
" so they turned the key , and opened the chest , and lo !
there lay the prettiest child you ever set eyes on .
so they were both glad , and were ready to keep the child , for they had no children of their own , and were so old they could now hope for none . now , after a little while , peter the pedlar began to wonder how it was no one came to woo his daughter , who was so rich in land , and had so much ready money .
at last , when no one came , off he went again to the stargazers , and offered them a heap of money if they could tell him whom his daughter was to have for a husband .
" why , we have told you already , that she is to have the miller ' s son down yonder ," said the stargazers .
" all very true , i daresay ," said peter the pedlar ; " but it so happens he ' s dead ; but if you can tell me whom she ' s to have , i ' ll give you two hundred dollars , and welcome .
" so the stargazers looked at the stars again , but they got quite cross , and said ,—" we told you before , and we tell you now , she is to have the miller ' s son , whom you threw into the river , and wished to make an end of ; for he is alive , safe and sound , in such and such a mill , far down the stream .
" so peter the pedlar gave them two hundred dollars for this news , and thought how he could best be rid of the miller ' s son .
the first thing peter did when he got home was to set off for the mill .
by that time the boy was so big that he had been confirmed , and went about the mill , and helped the miller .
such a pretty boy you never saw .
" can ' t you spare me that lad yonder ?"
said peter the pedlar to the miller .
" no , that i can ' t ," he answered ; " i ' ve brought him up as my own son , and he has turned out so well that now he ' s a great help and aid to me in the mill , for i ' m getting old and past work .
"" it ' s just the same with me ," said peter the pedlar ; that ' s why i ' d like to have some one to learn my trade .
now , if you ' ll give him up to me , i ' ll give you six hundred dollars , and then you can buy yourself a farm , and live in peace and quiet the rest of your days .
" yes , when the miller heard that , he let peter the pedlar have the lad . then the two travelled about far and wide , with their packs and wares , till they came to an inn , which lay by the edge of a great wood .
from this peter the pedlar sent the lad home with a letter to his wife , for the way was not so long if you took the short cut across the wood , and told him to tell her she was to be sure and do what was written in the letter as quickly as she could .
but it was written in the letter that she was to have a great pile made there and then , fire it , and cast the miller ' s son into it .
if she didn ' t do that , he ' d burn her alive himself when he came back .
so the lad set off with the letter across the wood , and when evening came on he reached a house far , far away in the wood , into which he went ; but inside he found no one .
in one of the rooms was a bed ready made , so he threw himself across it and fell asleep .
the letter he had stuck into his hat - band , and the hat he pulled over his face .
so when the robbers came back — for in that house twelve robbers had their abode — and saw the lad lying on the bed , they began to wonder who he could be , and one of them took the letter and broke it open , and read it ." he !
he !"
said he ; " this comes from peter the pedlar , does it ?
now we ' ll play him a trick .
it would be a pity if the old niggard made an end of such a pretty lad .
" so the robbers wrote another letter to peter the pedlar ' s wife , and fastened it under his hat - band while he slept ; and in that they wrote that as soon as ever she got it she was to make a wedding for her daughter and the miller ' s boy , and give them horses and cattle , and household stuff , and set them up for themselves in the farm which he had under the hill ; and if he didn ' t find all this done by the time he came back she ' d smart for it — that was all . next day the robbers let the lad go , and when he came home and delivered the letter , he said he was to greet her kindly from peter the pedlar , and to say that she was to carry out what was written in the letter as soon as ever she could .
" you must have behaved very well then ," said peter the pedlar ' s wife to the miller ' s boy , " if he can write so about you now , for when you set off , he was so mad against you he didn ' t know how to put you out of the way ."
so she married them on the spot , and set them up for themselves , with horses , and cattle , and household stuff , in the farm up under the hill .
no long time after peter the pedlar came home , and the first thing he asked was , if she had done what he had written in his letter .
" ay !
ay !"
she said ; " i thought it rather odd , but i dared not do anything else ;" and so peter asked where his daughter was .
" why , you know well enough where she is ," said his wife .
" where should she be but up at the farm under the hill , as you wrote in the letter .
" so when peter the pedlar came to hear the whole story , and came to see the letter , he got so angry he was ready to burst with rage , and off he ran up to the farm to the young couple .
" it ' s all very well , my son , to say you have got my daughter ," he said to the miller ' s lad ; " but if you wish to keep her , you must go to the dragon of deepferry , and get me three feathers out of his tail ; for he who has them may get anything he chooses .
"" but where shall i find him ?"
said his son - in - law .
" i ' m sure i can ' t tell ," said peter the pedlar ; " that ' s your look - out , not mine .
" so the lad set off with a stout heart , and after he had walked some way he came to a king ' s palace .
" here i ' ll just step in and ask ," he said to himself , for such great folk know more about the world than others , and perhaps i may here learn the way to the dragon .
" then the king asked him whence he came , and whither he was going ?" oh !"
said the lad , " i ' m going to the dragon of deepferry to pluck three feathers out of his tail , if i only knew where to find him .
"" you must take luck with you , then ," said the king , " for i never heard of any one who came back from that search .
but if you find him , just ask him from me why i can ' t get clear water in my well ; for i ' ve dug it out time after time , and still i can ' t get a drop of clear water .
"" yes , i ' ll be sure to ask him ," said the lad .
so he lived on the fat of the land at the palace , and got money and food when he left it .
at even he came to another king ' s palace ; and when he went into the kitchen , the king came out of the parlour and asked whence he came , and on what errand he was bound .
" oh ," said the lad , " i ' m going to the dragon of deepferry to pluck three feathers out of his tail .
"" then you must take luck with you ," said the king , for i never yet heard that any one came back who went to look for him .
but if you find him , be so good as to ask him from me where my daughter is , who has been lost so many years .
i have hunted for her , and had her name given out in every church in the country , but no one can tell me anything about her .
" yes , i ' ll mind and do that ," said the lad ; and in that palace too he lived on the best , and when he went away he got both money and food . so when evening drew on again he came at last to another king ' s palace .
here who should come out into the kitchen but the queen , and she asked him whence he came , and on what errand he was bound .
" i ' m going to the dragon of deepferry , to pluck three feathers out of his tail ," said the lad .
" then you ' d better take a good piece of luck with you ," said the queen , " for i never heard of any one that came back from him .
but if you find him , just be good enough to ask him from me where i shall find my gold keys which i have lost .
"" yes , i ' ll be sure to ask him ," said the lad . well , when he left the palace he came to a great broad river ; and while he stood there , and wondered whether he should cross it or go down along the bank , an old hunch - backed man came up , and asked whither he was going .
" oh , i ' m going to the dragon of deepferry , if i could only find any one to tell where i can find him .
"" i can tell you that ," said the man ; " for here i go backwards and forwards , and carry those over who are going to see him .
he lives just across , and when you climb the hill you ' ll see his castle ; but mind , if you come to talk with him , to ask him from me how long i ' m to stop here and carry folk over .
"" i ' ll be sure to ask him ," said the lad . so the man took him on his back and carried him over the river ; and when he climbed the hill he saw the castle and went in . he found there a princess who lived with the dragon all alone ; and she said ,—" but , dear friend , how can christian folk dare to come hither ?
none have been here since i came , and you ' d best be off as fast as you can ; for as soon as the dragon comes home he ' ll smell you out , and gobble you up in a trice , and that ' ll make me so unhappy .
"" nay , nay !"
said the lad ; " i can ' t go before i ' ve got three feathers out of his tail .
"" you ' ll never get them ," said the princess ; " you ' d best be off .
" but the lad wouldn ' t go ; he would wait for the dragon , and get the feathers , and an answer to all his questions .
" well , since you ' re so steadfast i ' ll see what i can do to help you ," said the princess ; " just try to lift that sword that hangs on the wall yonder .
" no ; the lad could not even stir it .
" i thought so ," said the princess ; " but just take a drink out of this flask .
" so when the lad had sat a while , he was to try again ; and then he could just stir it ." well !
you must take another drink ," said the princess , " and then you may as well tell me your errand hither .
" so he took another drink , and then he told her how one king had begged him to ask the dragon how it was he couldn ' t get clear water in his well ?— how another had bidden him ask what had become of his daughter , who had been lost many years since ?— and how a queen had begged him to ask the dragon what had become of her gold keys ?— and , last of all , how the ferryman had begged him to ask the dragon how long he was to stop there and carry folk over ?
when he had done his story , and took hold of the sword , he could lift it ; and when he had taken another drink , he could brandish it .
" now ," said the princess , " if you don ' t want the dragon to make an end of you you ' d best creep under the bed , for night is drawing on , and he ' ll soon be home , and then you must lie as still as you can lest he should find you out .
and when we have gone to bed , i ' ll ask him , but you must keep your ears open , and snap up all that he says ; and under the bed you must lie till all is still and the dragon falls asleep ; then creep out softly and seize the sword , and as soon as he rises , look out to hew off his head at one stroke , and at the same time pluck out the three feathers , for else he ' ll tear them out himself , that no one may get any good by them .
" so the lad crept under the bed and the dragon came home .
" what a smell of christian flesh ," said the dragon .
" oh yes ," said the princess , " a raven came flying with a man ' s bone in his bill , and perched on the roof .
no doubt it ' s that you smell .
"" so it is , i daresay ," said the dragon . so the princess served supper ; and after they had eaten , they went to bed .
but after they had lain a while , the princess began to toss about , and all at once she started up and said ,—" ah !
ah !
"" what ' s the matter ?"
said the dragon .
" oh ," said the princess , " i can ' t rest at all , and i ' ve had such a strange dream .
"" what did you dream about ?
let ' s hear ?"
said the dragon .
" i thought a king came here , and asked you what he must do to get clear water in his well .
"" oh ," said the dragon , " he might just as well have found that out for himself .
if he dug the well out , and took out the old rotten stump which lies at the bottom , he ' d get clear water fast enough .
but be still now , and don ' t dream any more .
" when the princess had lain a while , she began to toss about , and at last she started up with her " ah !
ah !
"" what ' s the matter now ?"
said the dragon ." oh !
i can ' t get any rest at all , and i ' ve had such a strange dream ," said the princess .
" why , you seem full of dreams to - night ," said the dragon : " what was your dream now ?
"" i thought a king came here , and asked you what had become of his daughter who had been lost many years since ," said the princess .
" why , you are she ," said the dragon ; " but he ' ll never set eyes on you again .
but now , do pray be still , and let me get some rest , and don ' t let ' s have any more dreams , else i ' ll break your ribs .
" well , the princess hadn ' t lain much longer before she began to toss about again .
at last she started up with her " ah !
ah !"" what !
are you at it again ?"
said the dragon .
what ' s the matter now ?"
for he was wild and sleep - surly , so that he was ready to fly to pieces .
" oh , don ' t be angry " said the princess ; " but i ' ve had such a strange dream .
"" the deuce take your dreams ," roared the dragon ; what did you dream this time ?
"" i thought a queen came here , who asked you to tell her where she would find her gold keys , which she has lost .
"" oh ," said the dragon , " she ' ll find them soon enough if she looks among the bushes where she lay that time she wots of .
but do now let me have no more dreams , but sleep in peace .
" so they slept a while ; but then the princess was just as restless as ever , and at last she screamed out —" ah !
ah !
"" you ' ll never behave till i break your neck ," said the dragon , who was now so wroth that sparks of fire flew out of his eyes .
" what ' s the matter now ?
"" oh , don ' t be so angry ," said the princess ; " i can ' t bear that ; but i ' ve had such a strange dream .
"" bless me !"
said the dragon ; " if i ever heard the like of these dreams — there ' s no end to them .
and pray , what did you dream now ?
"" i thought the ferryman down at the ferry came and asked how long he was to stop there and carry folk over ," said the princess .
" the dull fool !"
said the dragon ; " he ' d soon be free if he chose .
when any one comes who wants to go across he has only to take and throw him into the river , and say ' now , carry folk over yourself till some one sets you free .'
but now , pray let ' s have an end of these dreams , else i ' ll lead you a pretty dance .
" so the princess let him sleep on .
but as soon as all was still , and the miller ' s lad heard that the dragon snored , he crept out .
before it was light the dragon rose ; but he had scarce set both his feet on the floor before the lad cut off his head , and plucked three feathers out of his tail .
then came great joy , and both the lad and the princess took as much gold , and silver , and money , and precious things as they could carry ; and when they came down to the ford , they so puzzled the ferryman with all they had to tell , that he quite forgot to ask what the dragon had said about him till they had got across .
" halloa , you sir ," he said , as they were going off , " did you ask the dragon what i begged you to ask ?
"" yes , i did ," said the lad , " and he said , ' when any one comes and wants to go over , you must throw him into the midst of the river , and say ' now , carry folk over yourself till some one comes to set you free ,' and then you ' ll be free .
"" ah , bad luck to you ," said the ferryman ; " had you told me that before you might have set me free yourself .
" so when they got to the first palace , the queen asked if he had spoken to the dragon about her gold keys .
" yes ," said the lad , and whispered in the queen ' s ear ; " he said you must look among the bushes where you lay the day you wot of ."" hush !
hush !
don ' t say a word ," said the queen , and gave the lad a hundred dollars . when they came to the second palace the king asked if he had spoken to the dragon of what he begged him .
" yes ," said the lad , " i did ; and see , here is your daughter .
" at that the king was so glad he would gladly have given the princess to the miller ' s lad to wife , and half the kingdom beside ; but as he was married already he gave him two hundred dollars , and coaches and horses , and as much gold and silver as he could carry away . when he came to the third king ' s palace , out came the king and asked if he had asked the dragon of what he begged him .
" yes ," said the lad , " and he said you must dig out the well , and take out the rotten old stump which lies at the bottom , and then you ' ll get plenty of clear water .
" then the king gave him three hundred dollars , and he set out home ; but he was so loaded with gold and silver , and so grandly clothed , that it gleamed and glistened from him , and he was now far richer than peter the pedlar . when peter got the feathers he hadn ' t a word more to say against the wedding ; but when he saw all that wealth , he asked if there was much still left at the dragon ' s castle .
" yes , i should think so ," said the lad ; " there was much more than i could carry with me — so much , that you might load many horses with it ; and if you choose to go you may be sure there ' ll be enough for you .
" so his son - in - law told him the way so clearly that he hadn ' t to ask it of any one .
" but the horses ," said the lad , " you ' d best leave this side the river ; for the old ferryman , he ' ll carry you over safe enough .
" so peter set off , and took with him great store of food , and many horses ; but these he left behind him on the river ' s brink , as the lad had said .
and the old ferryman took him upon his back ; but when they had come a bit out into the stream he cast him into the midst of the river , and said ,—" now you may go backwards and forwards here , and carry folk over till you are set free .
" and unless some one has set him free , there goes rich peter the pedlar backwards and forwards , and carries folk across this very day .
