once on a time there was a poor man who had three sons .
when he died , the two elder set off into the world to try their luck , but the youngest they wouldn ' t have with them at any price .
" as for you ," they said , " you ' re fit for nothing but to sit and poke about in the ashes .
" so the two went off and got places at a palace — the one under the coachman , and the other under the gardener .
but boots , he set off too , and took with him a great kneading - trough , which was the only thing his parents left behind them , but which the other two would not bother themselves with .
it was heavy to carry , but he did not like to leave it behind , and so , after he had trudged a bit , he too came to the palace , and asked for a place .
so they told him they did not want him , but he begged so prettily that at last he got leave to be in the kitchen , and carry in wood and water for the kitchen maid .
he was quick and ready , and in a little while every one liked him ; but the two others were dull , and so they got more kicks than half pence , and grew quite envious of boots , when they saw how much better he got on . just opposite the palace , across a lake , lived a troll , who had seven silver ducks which swam on the lake , so that they could be seen from the palace .
these the king had often longed for ; and so the two elder brothers told the coachman ,—" if our brother only chose , he has said he could easily get the king those seven silver ducks .
" you may fancy it wasn ' t long before the coachman told this to the king ; and the king called boots before him , and said ,—" your brothers say you can get me the silver ducks ; so now go and fetch them .
"" i ' m sure i never thought or said anything of the kind ," said the lad .
" you did say so , and you shall fetch them ," said the king , who would hold his own .
" well , well ," said the lad ; " needs must , i suppose ; but give me a bushel of rye and a bushel of wheat , and i ' ll try what i can do .
" so he got the rye and the wheat , and put them into the kneading - trough he had brought with him from home , got in , and rowed across the lake .
when he reached the other side he began to walk along the shore , and to sprinkle and strew the grain , and at last he coaxed the ducks into his kneadin - trough , and rowed back as fast as ever he could . when he got half over , the troll came out of his house and set eyes on him ." halloa !"
roared out the troll ; " is it you that has gone off with my seven silver ducks ?"" ay !
ay !"
said the lad .
" shall you be back soon ?"
asked the troll .
" very likely ," said the lad . so when he got back to the king , with the seven silver ducks , he was more liked than ever , and even the king was pleased to say , " well done !"
but at this his brothers grew more and more spiteful and envious ; and so they went and told the coachman that their brother had said if he chose , he was man enough to get the king the troll ' s bed - quilt , which had a gold patch and a silver patch , and a silver patch and a gold patch ; and this time , too , the coachman was not slow in telling all this to the king .
so the king said to the lad , how his brothers had said he was good to steal the troll ' s bed - quilt , with gold and silver patches ; so now he must go and do it , or lose his life . boots answered , he had never thought or said any such thing ; but when he found there was no help for it , he begged for three days to think over the matter . so when the three days were gone , he rowed over in his kneading - trough , and went spying about .
at last , he saw those in the troll ' s cave come out and hang the quilt out to air , and as soon as ever they had gone back into the face of the rock , boots pulled the quilt down , and rowed away with it as fast as he could . and when he was half across , out came the troll and set eyes on him , and roared out ,—" halloa !
it is you who took my seven silver ducks ?"" ay !
ay !"
said the lad .
" and now , have you taken my bed - quilt , with silver patches and gold patches , and gold patches and silver patches ?"" ay !
ay !"
said the lad .
" shall you come back again ?
"" very likely ," said the lad . but when he got back with the gold and silver patchwork quilt every one was fonder of him than ever and he was made the king ' s body - servant . at this the other two were still more vexed , and to be revenged , they went and told the coachman ,—" now , our brother has said he is man enough to get the king the gold harp which the troll has , and that harp is of such a kind that all who listen when it is played grow glad , however sad they may be .
" yes ; the coachman went and told the king , and he said to the lad ,—" if you have said this you shall do it .
if you do it you shall have the princess and half the kingdom .
if you don ' t , you shall lose your life .
"" i ' m sure i never thought or said anything of the kind ," said the lad ; " but if there ' s no help for it , i may as well try ; but i must have six days to think about it .
" yes , he might have six days , but when they were over he must set out . then he took a tenpenny nail , a birch - pin , and a waxen taper - end in his pocket , and rowed across , and walked up and down before the troll ' s cave , looking stealthily about him .
so when the troll came out he saw him at once .
" ho , ho !"
roared the troll ; " is it you who took my seven silver ducks ?"" ay !
ay !"
said the lad .
" and it is you who took my bed - quilt , with the gold and silver patches ?"
asked the troll ." ay !
ay !"
said the lad . so the troll caught hold of him at once , and took him off into the cave in the face of the rock .
" now , daughter dear ," said the troll , " i ' ve caught the fellow who stole the silver ducks and my bed - quilt with gold and silver patches ; put him into the fattening coop , and when he ' s fat we ' ll kill him , and make a feast for our friends .
" she was willing enough , and put him at once into the fattening coop , and there he stayed eight days , fed on the best , both in meat and drink , and as much as he could cram .
so , when the eight days were over , the troll said to his daughter to go down and cut him in his little finger , that they might see if he were fat .
down she came to the coop .
" out with your little finger !"
she said . but boots stuck out his tenpenny nail , and she cut at it .
" nay , nay !
he ' s as hard as iron still ," said the troll ' s daughter , when she got back to her father ; " we can ' t take , him yet .
" after another eight days the same thing happened , and this time boots stuck out his birchen pin .
" well , he ' s a little better ," she said , when she got back to the troll ; " but still he ' ll be as hard as wood to chew .
" but when another eight days were gone , the troll told his daughter to go down and see if he wasn ' t fat now .
" out with your little finger ," said the troll ' s daughter , when she reached the coop , and this time boots stuck out the taper end .
" now he ' ll do nicely ," she said .
" will he ?"
said the troll .
" well , then , i ' ll just set off and ask the guests ; meantime you must kill him , and roast half and boil half .
" so when the troll had been gone a little while , the daughter began to sharpen a great long knife .
" is that what you ' re going to kill me with ?"
asked the lad .
" yes , it is ," said she .
" but it isn ' t sharp ," said the lad .
" just let me sharpen it for you , and then you ' ll find it easier work to kill me .
" so she let him have the knife , and he began to rub and sharpen it on the whetstone .
" just let me try it on one of your hair plaits ; i think it ' s about right now .
" so he got leave to do that ; but at the same time that he grasped the plait of hair he pulled back her head , and at one gash cut off the troll ' s daughter ' s head ; and half of her he roasted and half of her he boiled , and served it all up . after that he dressed himself in her clothes , and sat away in the corner . so when the troll came home with his guests , he called out to his daughter — for he thought all the time it was his daughter — to come and take a snack .
" no , thank , you ," said the lad , " i don ' t care for food , i ' m so sad and downcast ."" oh !"
said the troll , " if that ' s all , you know the cure ; take the harp , and play a tune on it ."" yes !"
said the lad ; " but where has it got to ; i can ' t find it .
"" why , you know well enough ," said the troll ; " you used it last ; where should it be but over the door yonder ?
" the lad did not wait to be told twice ; he took down the harp , and went in and out playing tunes ; but , all at once he shoved off the kneading - trough , jumped into it , and rowed off , so that the foam flew around the trough . after a while the troll thought his daughter was a long while gone , and went out to see what ailed her ; and then he saw the lad in the trough , far , far out on the lake ." halloa !
is it you ," he roared , " that took my seven silver ducks ?
"" ay , ay !"
said the lad .
" is it you that took my bed - quilt , with the gold and silver patches ?"" yes !"
said the lad .
" and now you have taken off my gold harp ?"
screamed the troll ." yes !"
said the lad ; " i ' ve got it , sure enough .
"" and haven ' t i eaten you up after all , then ?
"" no , no !
' twas your own daughter you ate ," answered the lad . but when the troll heard that , he was so sorry , he burst ; and then boots rowed back , and took a whole heap of gold and silver with him , as much as the trough could carry .
and so , when he came to the palace with the gold harp he got the princess and half the kingdom , as the king had promised him ; and , as for his brothers , he treated them well , for he thought they had only wished his good when they said what they had said .
