once on a time there was a widower , who had a house keeper named grizzel , who set her mutch at him , and teazed him early and late to marry her .
at last the man got so weary of her he was at his wit ' s end to know how to get rid of her . so it fell on a day , between hay time and harvest , the two went out to pull hemp .
grizzel ' s head was full of her good looks and her handiness , and she worked away at the hemp till she grew giddy from the strong smell of the ripe seed , and at last down she fell flat , fast asleep among the hemp .
while she slept , her master got a pair of scissors and cut her skirts short all round , and then he rubbed her all over , face and all , first with tallow and then with soot , till she looked worse than the deil himself .
so , when grizzel woke and saw how ugly she was , she didn ' t know herself .
" can this be me , now ?"
said grizzel , " nay , nay !
it can never be me .
so ugly have i never been ; it ' s surely the deil himself ?" well !
that she might really know the truth , she went off and knocked at her master ' s door , and asked ,—" is your girzie at home the day , father ?
"" ay , ay , our girzie is at home safe enough ," said the man , who wanted to be rid of her .
" well , well !"
she said to herself , " then i can ' t be his grizzel ," and stole away ; and right glad the man was , i can tell you . so , when she had walked a bit she came to a great wood , where she met two thieves .
" the very men for my money ," thought grizzel , " since i am the deil thieves are just fit fellows for me .
" but the thieves were not of the same mind , not they .
as soon as they set eyes on her they took to their heels as fast as they could , for they thought the evil one was come to catch them .
but it was no good , for grizzel was long - legged and swift - footed , and she came up with them before they knew where they were .
" if you ' re going out to steal , i ' ll go with you and help ," said grizzel , " for i know the whole country round ."
so , when the thieves heard that , they thought they had found a good mate , and were no longer afraid . then they said they were off to steal a sheep , only they didn ' t know where to lay hold of one ." oh !"
said grizzel , " that ' s a small matter , for i was maid with a farmer ever so long out in the wood yonder , and i could find the sheepfold though the night were dark as pitch .
" the thieves thought that grand ; and when they came to the place , grizzel was to go into the fold and turn out the sheep , and they were to lay hold on it .
now , the sheepfold lay close to the wall of the room where the farmer slept , so grizzel crept quite softly and carefully into the fold ; but as soon as she got in she began to scream out to the thieves .
" will you have a wether or a ewe ?
here are lots to choose from .
"" hush , hush !"
said the thieves , " only take one that is fine and fat .
"" yes , yes !
but will you have a wether or a ewe ?
will you have a wether or a ewe ?
for here are lots to choose from ," screeched grizzel .
" hush , hush !"
said the thieves again , " only take one that ' s fine and fat ; it ' s all the same to us whether it ' s a wether or a ewe ."" yes !"
screeched grizzel , who stuck to her own ; " but will you have a wether or a ewe — a wether or a ewe ?
here are lots to choose from .
"" hold your jaw !"
said the thieves , " and take a fine fat one , wether or ewe , it ' s all one to us .
" but just then out came the farmer in his shirt , who had been waked by all this clatter , and wanted to see what was going on .
so the thieves took to their heels , and grizzel after them , upsetting the farmer in her flight .
" stop , boys !
stop , boys !"
she screamed ; but the farmer , who had only seen the black monster , grew so afraid that he could scarce stand , for he thought it was the deil himself that had been in his sheepfold .
the only help he knew was to go indoors and wake up the whole house ; and they all sat down to read and pray , for he had heard that was the way to send the deil about his business . now the next night the thieves said they must go and steal a fat goose , and grizzel was to show them the way .
so when they came to the goosepen , grizzel was to go in and turn one out , for she knew the ways of the place , and the thieves were to stand outside and catch it .
but as soon as ever she got in she began to scream ,—" will you have goose or gander ?
you may pick and choose here .
"" hush , hush !
choose only a fine fat one ," said the thieves .
" yes , yes !
but will you have goose or gander — goose or gander ?
you may pick and choose ," screamed grizzel .
" hush , hush !
only choose one that ' s fine and fat , and it ' s all one to us whether it ' s goose or gander ; but do hold your jaw ," said they . but while grizzel and the thieves were settling this , one of the geese began to cackle , and then another cackled , and then the whole flock cackled and hissed , and out came the farmer to see what all the noise could mean , and away went the thieves , and grizzel after them at full speed , and the farmer thought again it was the black deil flying away ; for long - legged she was , and she had no skirts to hamper her .
" stop a bit , boys !"
she kept on screaming , " you might as well have said whether you would have goose or gander .
" but they had no time to stop , they thought ; and , as for the farmer , he began to read and pray with all his house , small and great , for they thought it was the deil , and no mistake . now , the third day , when night came , the thieves and grizzel were so hungry they did not know what to do ; so they made up their minds to go to the larder of a rich farmer who lived by the wood ' s side , and steal some food .
well , off they went , but the thieves did not dare to venture themselves , so grizzel was to go up the steps which led to the larder , and hand the food out , and the others were to stand below and take it from her .
so when grizzel got inside she saw the larder was full of all sorts of things , fresh meat and salt , and sausages and oat - cake .
the thieves begged her to be still , and just throw out something to eat , and to bear in mind how badly they had fared for two nights .
but grizzel stuck to her own , that she did .
" will you have fresh meat or salt , or sausages , or oat - cake ?
just look , what lovely oat - cake ," she bawled out enough to split your head .
" you may have what you please , for here ' s plenty to choose from .
" but the farmer woke with all this noise , and ran out to see what it all meant .
as for the thieves , off they ran as fast as they could ; but while the farmer was looking after them down came grizzel so black and ugly .
" stop a bit !
stop a bit , boys !"
she bellowed ; " you may have what you please , for there ' s plenty to choose from .
" and when the farmer saw that ugly monster he too thought the deil was loose , for he had heard what had happened to his neighbours the evenings before ; so he began both to read and pray , and every one in the whole parish began to read and pray , for they knew that you could read the devil away . the next evening was saturday evening , and the thieves wanted to steal a fat ram for their sunday dinner ; and well they might , for they had fasted many days , but they wouldn ' t have grizzel with them at any price .
she brought bad luck with her jaw , they said ; so while grizzel was walking about waiting for them on sunday morning , she got so awfully hungry — for she had fasted for three days — that she went into a turnip field and pulled up some turnips to eat .
but when the farmer who owned the turnips rose , he felt uneasy in his mind , and thought he would just go and take a look at his turnips on the sunday morning .
so he pulled on his trousers and went across the moss which lay under the hill , where the turnip - field lay .
but when he got to the bottom of the field he saw something black walking about in the field and pulling up his turnips , and he soon made up his mind that it was the deil .
so away he ran home as fast as he could , and said the deil was among the turnips .
this frightened the whole house out of their wits , and they agreed they ' d best send for the priest , and get him to bind the deil .
" that won ' t do ," said the goodwife ; " this is sunday morning , you ' ll never get the priest to come ; for either he ' ll be in bed , or , if he ' s up , he ' ll be learning his sermon by heart .
"" oh ," said the goodman , " never fear ; i ' ll promise him a fat loin of veal , and then he ' ll come fast enough .
" so off he went to the priest ' s house ; but when he got there sure enough the priest was still in bed .
the maid begged the farmer to walk into the parlour while she ran up to the priest , and said ,—" farmer so - and - so was down - stairs , and wished to have a word with him .
" well , when the priest heard that such a worthy man was down - stairs , he got up at once , and came down just as he was , in his slippers and night - cap . so the goodman told his errand ; how the deil was loose in his turnip - field ; and if the priest would only come and bind him , he would send him a fat loin of veal .
yes ; the priest was willing enough , and called out to his groom to saddle his horse , while he dressed himself .
" nay , nay , father !"
said the man ; " the deil won ' t wait for us long , and no one knows where we shall find him again if we miss him now .
your reverence must come , at once , just as you are .
" so the priest followed him just as he was , with the clothes he stood in , and went off in his nightcap and slippers .
but when they got to the moss it was so moist , the priest couldn ' t cross it in his slippers .
so the goodman took him on his back to carry him over .
on they went , the goodman picking his way from one clump to the other , till they got to the middle ; then grizzel caught sight of them , and thought it was the thieves bringing the ram .
" is he fat ?"
she screamed ; " is he fat ?"
and made such a noise that the wood rang again .
" the deil knows if he ' s fat or lean ; i ' m sure i don ' t ," said the goodman , when he heard that ; " but , if you want to know , you had better come yourself and see .
" and then he got so afraid he threw the priest head over heels into the soft wet moss , and took to his legs ; and if the priest hasn ' t got out , why i daresay he ' s lying there still .
