once on a time there was an old widow who had one son ; and as she was poorly and weak , her son had to go up into the safe to fetch meal for cooking ; but when he got outside the safe , and was just going down the steps , there came the north wind , puffing and blowing , caught up the meal , and so away with it through the air .
then the lad went back into the safe for more ; but when he came out again on the steps , if the north wind didn ' t come again and carry off the meal with a puff ; and more than that , he did so the third time .
at this the lad got very angry ; and as he thought it hard that the north wind should behave so , he thought he ' d just look him up , and ask him to give up his meal . so off he went , but the way was long , and he walked and walked ; but at last he came to the north wind ' s house .
" good day !"
said the lad , and " thank you for coming to see us yesterday .
"" good day !"
answered the north wind , for his voice was loud and gruff , " and thanks for coming to see me .
what do you want ?"" oh !"
answered the lad , " i only wished to ask you to be so good as to let me have back that meal you took from me on the safe steps , for we haven ' t much to live on ; and if you ' re to go on snapping up the morsel we have there ' ll be nothing for it but to starve .
"" i haven ' t got your meal ," said the north wind ; " but if you are in such need , i ' ll give you a cloth which will get you everything you want , if you only say , ' cloth , spread yourself , and serve up all kind of good dishes !'
" with this the lad was well content .
but , as the way was so long , he couldn ' t get home in one day , so he turned into an inn on the way ; and when they were going to sit down to supper , he laid the cloth on a table which stood in the corner and said ,—" cloth , spread yourself , and serve up all kinds of good dishes .
" he had scarce said so before the cloth did as it was bid ; and all who stood by thought it a fine thing , but most of all the landlady .
so , when all were fast asleep , at dead of night , she took the lad ' s cloth , and put another in its stead , just like the one he had got from the north wind , but which couldn ' t so much as serve up a bit of dry bread . so , when the lad woke , he took his cloth and went off with it , and that day he got home to his mother .
" now ," said he , " i ' ve been to the north wind ' s house , and a good fellow he is , for he gave me this cloth , and when i only say to it , ' cloth , spread yourself , and serve up all kind of good dishes ,' i get any sort of food i please .
"" all very true , i daresay ," said his mother ; " but seeing is believing , and i shan ' t believe it till i see it .
" so the lad made haste , drew out a table , laid the cloth on it , and said ,—" cloth , spread yourself , and serve up all kind of good dishes .
" but never a bit of dry bread did the cloth serve up .
" well ," said the lad , " there ' s no help for it but to go to the north wind again ;" and away he went . so he came to where the north wind lived late in the afternoon .
" good evening !"
said the lad .
" good evening !"
said the north wind .
" i want my rights for that meal of ours which you took ," said the lad ; " for as for that cloth i got , it isn ' t worth a penny .
"" i ' ve got no meal " said the north wind ; " but yonder you have a ram which coins nothing but golden ducats as soon as you say to it —" ' ram , ram !
make money !'
" so the lad thought this a fine thing ; but as it was too far to get home that day , he turned in for the night to the same inn where he had slept before . before he called for anything , he tried the truth of what the north wind had said of the ram , and found it all right ; but when the landlord saw that , he thought it was a famous ram , and , when the lad had fallen asleep , he took another which couldn ' t coin gold ducats , and changed the two . next morning , off went the lad ; and when he got home to his mother , he said ,—" after all , the north wind is a jolly fellow ; for now he has given me a ram which can coin golden ducats if i only say , ' ram , ram !
make money !'
"" all very true , i daresay ," said his mother ; " but i shan ' t believe any such stuff until i see the ducats made .
"" ram , ram !
make money !"
said the lad ; but if the the ram made anything it wasn ' t money . so the lad went back again to the north wind , and blew him up , and said the ram was worth nothing , and he must have his rights for the meal .
" well ," said the north wind ; " i ' ve nothing else to give you but that old stick in the corner yonder ; but it ' s a stick of that kind that if you say —" ' stick , stick !
lay on !'
it lays on till you say —" ' stick , stick !
now stop !'
" so , as the way was long , the lad turned in this night too to the landlord ; but as he could pretty well guess how things stood as to the cloth and the ram , he lay down at once on the bench and began to snore , as if he were asleep . now the landlord , who easily saw that the stick must be worth something , hunted up one which was like it , and when he heard the lad snore , was going to change the two , but just as the landlord was about to take it the lad bawled out —" stick , stick !
lay on !
" so the stick began to beat the landlord , till he jumped over chairs , and tables , and benches , and yelled and roared ,—" oh my !
oh my !
bid the stick be still , else it will beat me to death , and you shall have back both your cloth and your ram .
" when the lad thought the landlord had got enough , he said —" stick , stick !
now stop !
" then he took the cloth and put it into his pocket , and went home with his stick in his hand , leading the ram by a cord round its horns ; and so he got his rights for the meal he had lost .
