once upon a time there was a poor cottager who had three sons .
he had nothing to leave them when he died , and no money with which to put them to any trade , so that he did not know what to make of them .
at last he said he would give them leave to take to anything each liked best , and to go whithersoever they pleased , and he would go with them a bit of the way ; and so he did .
he went with them till they came to a place where three roads met , and there each of them chose a road , and their father bade them good - bye , and went back home .
i have never heard tell what became of the two older ; but as for the youngest , he went both far and long , as you shall hear . so it fell out one night as he was going through a great wood that such bad weather overtook him .
it blew , and sleeted , and drove so that he could scarce keep his eyes open ; and in a trice , before he knew how it was , he got bewildered , and could not find either road or path .
but as he went on and on , at last he saw a glimmering of light far far off in the wood .
so he thought he would try and get to the light ; and after a time he did reach it .
there it was in a large house , and the fire was blazing so brightly inside that he could tell the folk had not yet gone to bed ; so he went in and saw an old dame bustling about and minding the house .
" good evening !"
said the youth .
" good evening !"
said the old dame ." hutetu !
it ' s such foul weather out of doors to - night ," said he .
" so it is ," said she .
" can i get leave to have a bed and shelter here to - night ?"
asked the youth .
" you ' ll get no good by sleeping here ," said the old dame ; for if the folk come home and find you here , they ' ll kill both me and you .
"" what sort of folk , then , are they who live here ?"
asked the youth .
" oh , robbers !
and a bad lot of them too ," said the old dame .
" they stole me away when i was little , and have kept me as their housekeeper ever since .
"" well , for all that , i think i ' ll just go to bed ," said the youth .
" come what may , i ' ll not stir out at night in such weather .
"" very well ," said the old dame ; " but if you stay , it be the worse for you .
" with that the youth got into a bed which stood there , but he dared not go to sleep , and very soon after in came the robbers ; so the old dame told them how a stranger fellow had come in whom she had not been able to get out of the house again .
" did you see if he had any money ?"
said the robbers .
" such a one as he money !"
said the old dame , " the tramper !
why , if he had clothes to his back , it was as much as he had .
" then the robbers began to talk among themselves what they should do with him ; if they should kill him outright , or what else they should do .
meantime the youth got up and began to talk to them , and to ask if they didn ' t want a servant , for it might be that he would be glad to enter their service .
" oh ," said they , " if you have a mind to follow the trade that we follow , you can very well get a place here .
"" it ' s all one to me what trade i follow ," said the youth ; " for when i left home father gave me leave to take to any trade i chose .
"" well , have you a mind to steal ?"
asked the robbers .
" i don ' t care ," said the youth , for he thought it would not take long to learn that trade . now there lived a man a little way off who had three oxen .
one of these he was to take to the town to sell , and the robbers had heard what he was going to do , so they said to the youth , if he were good to steal the ox from the man by the way without his knowing it , and without doing him any harm , they would give him leave to be their serving - man . well , the youth set off , and took with him a pretty shoe with a silver buckle on it , which lay about the house ; and he put the shoe in the road along which the man was going with his ox ; and when he had done that , he went into the wood and hid himself under a bush .
so when the man came by he saw the shoe at once .
" that ' s a nice shoe ," said he .
" if i only had the fellow to it , i ' d take it home , with me , and perhaps i ' d put my old dame in a good humour for once ."
for you must know he had an old wife , so cross and snappish , it was not long between each time that she boxed his ears .
but then he bethought him that he could do nothing with the odd shoe unless he had the fellow to it ; so he went on his way and let the shoe lie on the road . then the youth took up the shoe , aud made all the haste he could to get before the man by a short cut through the wood , and laid it down before him in the road again .
when the man came along with his ox , he got quite angry with himself for being so dull as to leave the fellow to the shoe lying in the road instead of taking it with him ; so he tied the ox to the fence , and said to himself , " i may just as well run back and pick up the other , and then i ' ll have a pair of good shoes for my old dame , and so , perhaps , i ' ll get a kind word from her for once .
" so he set off , and hunted and hunted up and down for the shoe , but no shoe did he find ; and at length he had to go back with the one he had .
but , meanwhile , the youth had taken the ox and gone off with it ; and when the man came and saw his ox gone , he began to cry and bewail , for he was afraid his old dame would kill him outright when she came to know that the ox was lost .
but just then it came across his mind that he would go home and take the second ox , and drive it to the town , and not let his old dame know anything about the matter .
so he did this , and went home and took the ox without his dame ' s knowing it , and set off with it to the town .
but the robbers knew all about it , and they said to the youth , if he could get this ox too , without the man ' s knowing it , and without his doing him any harm , he should be as good as any one of them .
if that were all , the youth said , he did not think it a very hard thing . this time he took with him a rope , and hung himself up under the armpits to a tree right in the man ' s way .
so the man came along with his ox , and when he saw such a sight hanging there he began to feel a little queer .
" well ," said he , " whatever heavy thoughts you had who have hanged yourself up there , it can ' t be helped ; you may hang for what i care !
i can ' t breathe life into you again ;" and with that he went on his way with his ox .
down slipped the youth from the tree , and ran by a footpath , and got before the man , and hung himself up right in his way again .
" bless me !"
said the man , " were you really so heavy at heart that you hanged yourself up there — or is it only a piece or witchcraft that i see before me ?
ay , ay !
you may hang for all i care , whether you are a ghost , or whatever you are ."
so he passed on with his ox . now the youth did just as he had done twice before ; he jumped down from the tree , ran through the wood by a footpath , and hung himself up right in the man ' s way again .
but when the man saw this sight for the third time , he said to himself ,—" well , this is an ugly business !
is it likely now that they should have been so heavy at heart as to hang themselves all these three ?
no !
i cannot think it is anything else than a piece of witchcraft that i see .
but now i ' ll soon know for certain ; if the other two are still hanging there , it must be really so ; but if they are not , then it can be nothing but witchcraft that i see .
" so he tied up his ox , and ran back to see if the others were still really hanging there .
but while he went and peered up into all the trees , the youth jumped down and took his ox and ran off with it .
when the man came back and found his ox gone , he was in a sad plight , and , as any one might know without being told , he began to cry and bemoan ; but at last he came to take it easier , and so he thought ,—" there ' s no other help for it than to go home and take the third ox without my dame ' s knowing it , and to try and drive a good bargain with it , so that i may get a good sum of money for it .
" so he went home and set off with the ox , and his old dame knew never a word about the matter .
but the robbers , they knew all about it , and they said to the youth , that if he could steal this ox as he had stolen the other two , then he should be master over the whole band .
well , the youth set off , and ran into the wood ; and as the man came by with his ox he set up a dreadful bellowing , just like a great ox in the wood .
when the man heard that , you can ' t think how glad he was , for it seemed to him that he knew the voice of his big bullock , and he thought that , now he should find both of them again ; so he tied up the third ox , and ran off from the road to look for them in the wood ; but meantime the youth went off with the third ox .
now , when the man came back and found he had lost this ox too , he was so wild that there was no end to his grief .
he cried and roared and beat his breast , and , to tell the truth , it was many days before he dared go home ; for he was afraid lest his old dame should kill him outright on the spot . as for the robbers , they were not very well pleased either , when they had to own that the youth was master over the whole band .
so one day they thought they would try their hands at something which he was not man enough to do ; and they set off all together , every man jack of them , and left him alone at home .
now , the first thing that he did when they were all well clear of the house , was to drive the oxen out to the road , so that they might run back to the man from whom he had stolen them ; and right glad he was to see them , as you may fancy .
next he took all the horses which the robbers had , and loaded them with the best things he could lay his hands on — gold and silver , and clothes , and other fine things ; and then he bade the old dame to greet the robbers when they came back , and to thank them for him , and to say that now he was setting off on his travels , and they would have hard work to find him again ; and with that , off he started . after a good bit he came to the road along which he was going when he fell among the robbers , and when he got near home , and could see his father ' s cottage , he put on an uniform which he had found among the clothes he had taken from the robbers , and which was made just like a general ' s .
so he drove up to the door as if he were any other great man .
after that he went in and asked if he could have a lodging .
no ; that he couldn ' t at any price .
" how ever should i be able ," said the man , " to make room in my house for such a fine gentleman — i who scarce have a rag to lie upon , and miserable rags , too ?
"" you always were a stingy old hunks ," said the youth , " and so you are still , when you won ' t take your own son in .
"" what , you my son !"
said the man .
" don ' t you know me again ?"
said the youth .
well , after a little while he did know him again .
" but what have you been turning your hand to , that you have made yourself so great a man in such haste ?"
asked the man .
" oh , i ' ll soon tell you ," said the youth .
" you said i might take to any trade i chose , and so i bound myself apprentice to a pack of thieves and robbers , and now have served my time out , and am become a master thief .
" now there lived a squire close by to his father ' s cottage , and he had such a great house , and such heaps of money , he could not tell how much he had .
he had a daughter too , and a smart and pretty girl she was .
so the master thief set his heart upon having her to wife , and he told his father to go to the squire and ask for his daughter for him .
" if he asks by what trade i get my living , you can say i ' m a master thief .
"" i think you ' ve lost your wits ," said the man , " for you can ' t be in your right mind when you think of such stuff .
" no , he had not lost his wits ; his father must and should go to the squire and ask for his daughter .
" nay , but i tell you , i daren ' t go to the squire and be your spokesman ; he who is so rich , and has so much money ," said the man . yes , there was no help for it , said the master thief ; he should go whether he would or no ; and if he did not go by fair means , he would soon make him go by foul .
but the man was still loath to go ; so he stopped after him , and rubbed him down with a good birch cudgel , and kept on till the man came crying and sobbing inside the squire ' s door .
" how now , my man !
what ails you ?"
said the squire . so he told him the whole story ; how he had three sons who set off one day , and how he had given them leave to go whithersoever they would , and to follow whatever calling they chose .
" and here now is the youngest come home , and has thrashed me till he has made me come to you and ask for your daughter for him to wife ; and he bids me say , besides , that he ' s a master thief ."
and so he fell to crying and sobbing again .
" never mind , my man ," said the squire laughing ; " just go back and tell him from me he must prove his skill first .
if he can steal the roast from the spit in the kitchen on sunday , while all the household are looking after it , he shall have my daughter .
just go and tell him that .
" so he went back and told the youth , who thought it would be an easy job .
so he set about and caught three hares alive , and put them into a bag , and dressed himself in some old rags , until he looked so poor and filthy that it made one ' s heart bleed to see ; and then he stole into the passage at the back - door of the squire ' s house on the sunday forenoon , with his bag , just like any other beggar - boy .
but the squire himself and all his household were in the kitchen watching the roast .
just as they were doing this , the youth let one hare go , and it set off and ran round and round the yard in front of the house .
" oh , just look at that hare !"
said the folk in the kitchen , and were all for running out to catch it . yes , the squire saw it running too .
" oh , let it run ," said he ; " there ' s no use in thinking to catch a hare on the spring .
" a little while after , the youth let the second hare go , and they saw it in the kitchen , and thought it was the same they had seen before , and still wanted to run out and catch it ; but the squire said again it was no use .
it was not long before the youth let the third hare go , and it set off and ran round and round the yard as the others before it .
now , they saw it from the kitchen , and still thought it was the same hare that kept on running about , and were all eager to be out after it .
" well , it is a fine hare ," said the squire ; " come , let ' s see if we can ' t lay our hands on it .
" so out he ran , and the rest with him — away they all went , the hare before , and they after ; so that it was rare fun to see .
but meantime the youth took the roast and ran off with it ; and where the squire got a roast for his dinner that day i don ' t know ; but one thing , i know , and that is , that he had no roast hare , though he ran after it till he was both warm and weary . now it chanced that the priest came to dinner that day , and when the squire told him what a trick the master thief had played him , he made such game of him that there was no end of it .
" for my part ," said the priest , " i can ' t think how it could ever happen to me to be made such a fool of by a fellow like that .
"" very well — only keep a sharp look - out ," said the squire ; " maybe he ' ll come to see you before you know a word of it ."
but the priest stuck to his text ,— that he did , and made game of the squire because he had been so taken in . later in the afternoon came the master thief , and wanted to have the squire ' s daughter , as he had given his word .
but the squire began to talk him over , and said , " oh , you must first prove your skill a little more ; for what you did to - day was no great thing after all .
couldn ' t you now play off a good trick on the priest , who is sitting in there , and making game of me for letting such a fellow as you twist me round his thumb ?
"" well , as for that , it wouldn ' t be hard ," said the master thief .
so he dressed himself up like a bird , threw a great white sheet over his body , took the wings of a goose , and tied them to his back , and so climbed up into a great maple which stood in the priest ' s garden .
and when the priest came home in the evening , the youth began to bawl out —" father laurence !
father laurence !
"— for that was the priest ' s name .
" who is that calling me ?"
said the priest .
" i am an angel ," said the master thief , " sent from god to let you know that you shall be taken up alive into heaven for your piety ' s sake .
next monday night you must hold yourself ready for the journey , for i shall come then to fetch you in a sack ; and all your gold and your silver , and all that you have of this world ' s goods , you must lay together in a heap in your dining - room .
" well , father laurence fell on his knees before the angel , and thanked him ; and the very next day he preached a farewell sermon , and gave it out how there had come down an angel unto the big maple in his garden , who had told him that he was to be taken up alive into heaven for his piety ' s sake ; and he preached and made such a touching discourse , that all who wore at church wept , both young and old . so the next monday night came the master thief like an angel again , and the priest fell on his knees and thanked him before he was put into the sack ; but when he had got him well in , the master thief drew and dragged him over stocks and stones ." ow !
ow !"
groaned the priest inside the sack , " wherever are we going ?
"" this is the narrow way which leadeth unto the kingdom of heaven ," said the master thief , who went on dragging him along till he had nearly broken every bone in his body .
at last he tumbled him into a goose - house that belonged to the squire , and the geese began pecking and pinching him with their bills , so that he was more dead than alive .
" now you are in the flames of purgatory , to be cleansed and purified for life everlasting ," said the master thief ; and with that he went his way , and took all the gold which the priest had laid together in his dining - room .
the next morning , when the goose - girl came to let the geese out , she heard how the priest lay in the sack , and bemoaned himself in the goose - house .
" in heaven ' s name , who ' s there , and what ails you ?"
she cried ." oh !"
said the priest , " if you are an angel from heaven , do let me out , and let me return again to earth , for it is worse here than in hell .
the little fiends keep on pinching me with tongs .
"" heaven help us , i am no angel at all ," said the girl , as she helped the priest out of the sack ; " i only look after the squire ' s geese , and like enough they are the little fiends which have pinched your reverence ."" oh !"
groaned the priest , " this is all that master thief ' s doing .
all my gold and my silver , and my fine clothes ."
and he beat his breast , and hobbled home at such a rate that the girl thought he had lost his wits all at once . now when the squire came to hear how it had gone with the priest , and how he had been along the narrow way , and into purgatory , he laughed till he wellnigh split his sides .
but when the master thief came and asked for his daughter as he had promised , the squire put him off again , and said —" you must do one masterpiece better still , that i may see plainly what you are fit for .
now , i have twelve horses in my stable , and on them i will put twelve grooms , one on each .
if you are so good a thief as to steal the horses from under them , i ' ll see what i can do for you .
"" very well , i daresay i can do it ," said the master thief ; " but shall i really have your daughter if i can ?
"" yes , if you can , i ' ll do my best for you ," said the squire . so the master thief set off to a shop , and bought brandy enough to fill two pocket - flasks , and into one of them he put a sleepy drink , but into the other only brandy .
after that he hired eleven men to lie in wait at night behind the squire ' s stableyard ; and last of all , for fair words and a good bit of money , he borrowed a ragged gown and cloak from an old woman ; and so , with a staff in his hand , and a bundle at his back , he limped off , as evening drew on , towards the squire ' s stable .
just as he got there they were watering the horses for the night , and had their hands full of work .
" what the devil do you want ?"
said one of the grooms to the old woman .
" oh , oh !
hutetu !
it is so bitter cold ," said she , and shivered and shook , and made wry faces .
" hutetu !
it is so cold , a poor wretch may easily freeze to death ;" and with that she fell to shivering and shaking again ." oh !
for the love of heaven , can i get leave to stay here a while , and sit inside the stable door ?
"" to the devil with your leave ," said one .
" pack yourself off this minute , for if the squire sets his eye on you , he ' ll lead us a pretty dance ."" oh !
the poor old bag of bones ," said another , whose heart took pity on her ; " the old hag may sit inside and welcome ; such a one as she can do no harm .
" and the rest said , some she should stay and some she shouldn ' t ; but while they were quarrelling and minding the horses , she crept farther and farther into the stable , till at last she sat herself down behind the door ; and when she had got so far , no one gave any more heed to her . as the night wore on , the men found it rather cold work to sit so still and quiet on horseback ." hutetu !
it is so devilish cold ," said one , and beat his arms crosswise .
" that it is ," said another ; " i freeze so that my teeth chatter .
"" if one only had a quid to chow ," said a third . well !
there was one who had an ounce or two ; so they shared it between them , though it wasn ' t much , after all , that each got ; and so they chewed and spat , and spat and chewed .
this helped them somewhat ; but in a little while they were just as bad as ever .
" hutetu " said one , and shivered and shook .
" hutetu ," said the old woman , and shivered so , that every tooth in her head chattered .
then she pulled out the flask with brandy in it , and her hand shook so that the spirit splashed about in the flask , and then she took such a gulp , that it went " bop " in her throat .
" what ' s that you ' ve got in your flask , old girl ?"
said one of the grooms .
" oh , it ' s only a drop of brandy , old man ," said she ." brandy !
well , i never !
do let me have a drop ," screamed the whole twelve , one after another .
" oh , but it is such a little drop ," mumbled the old woman , " it will not even wet your mouths round ."
but they must and would have it ; there was no help for it ; and so she pulled out the flask with the sleepy drink in it , and put it to the first man ' s lips ; then she shook no more , but guided the flask so that each of them got what he wanted , and the twelfth had not done drinking before the first sat and snored .
then the master thief threw off his beggar ' s rags , and took one groom after the other so softly off their horses , and set them astride on the beams between the stalls ; and so he called his eleven men , and rode off with the squire ' s twelve horses . but when the squire got up in the morning , and went to look after his grooms , they had just begun to come to ; and some of them fell to spurring the beams with their spurs , till the splinters flew again , and some fell off , and some still hung on and sat there looking like fools ." ho !
ho !"
said the squire ; " i see very well who has been here ; but as for you , a pretty set of blockheads you must be to sit here and let the master thief steal the horses from between your legs .
" so they all got a good leathering because they had not kept a sharper look - out . farther on in the day came the master thief again , and told how he had managed the matter , and asked for the squire ' s daughter , as he had promised ; but the squire gave him one hundred dollars down , and said he must do something better still .
" do you think now ," said he , " you can steal the horse from under me while i am out riding on his back ?
"" o , yes !
i daresay i could ," said the master thief , " if i were really sure of getting your daughter .
" well , well , the squire would see what he could do and he told the master thief a day when he would be taking a ride on a great common where they drilled the troops .
so the master thief soon got hold of an old worn - out jade of a mare , and set to work , and made traces and collar of withies and broom - twigs , and bought an old beggarly cart and a great cask .
after that he told an old beggar woman he would give her ten dollars if she would get inside the cask , and keep her mouth agape over the taphole , into which he was going to stick his finger .
no harm should happen to her ; she should only be driven about a little ; and if he took his finger out more than once , she was to have ten dollars more .
then he threw a few rags and tatters over himself , and stuffed himself out , and put on a wig and a great beard of goat ' s hair , so that no one could know him again , and set off for the common , where the squire had already been riding about a good bit .
when he reached the place , he went along so softly and slowly that he scarce made an inch of way .
" gee up !
gee up !"
and so he went on a little ; then he stood stock still , and so on a little again ; and altogether the pace was so poor it never once came into the squire ' s head that this could be the master thief . at last the squire rode right up to him , and asked if he had seen any one lurking about in the wood thereabouts .
" no ," said the man , " i haven ' t seen a soul .
"" harkye , now ," said the squire , " if you have a mind to ride into the wood , and hunt about and see if you can fall upon any one lurking about there , you shall have the loan of my horse , and a shilling into the bargain , to drink my health for your pains .
"" i don ' t see how i can go ," said the man , " for i am going to a wedding with this cask of mead , which i have been to town to fetch , and here the tap has fallen out by the way , and so i must go along holding my finger in the taphole .
"" ride off ," said the squire ; " i ' ll look after your horse and cask .
" well , on these terms the man was willing to go ; but he begged the squire to be quick in putting his finger into the taphole when he took his own out , and to mind and keep it there till he came back .
at last the squire grew weary of standing there with his finger in the taphole , so he took it out .
" now i shall have ten dollars more !"
screamed the old woman inside the cask ; and then the squire saw at once how the land lay , and took himself off home ; but he had not gone far before they met him with a fresh horse , for the master thief had already been to his house , and told them to send one . the day after he came to the squire and would have his daughter , as he had given his word ; but the squire put him off again with fine words , and gave him two hundred dollars , and said he must do one more masterpiece .
if he could do that , he should have her .
well , well , the master thief thought he could do it , if he only knew what it was to be .
" do you think , now ," said the squire , " you can steal the sheet off our bed , and the shift off my wife ' s back .
do you think you could do that ?
"" it shall be done ," said the master thief .
" i only wish i was as sure of getting your daughter .
" so when night began to fall , the master thief went out and cut down a thief who hung on the gallows , and threw him across his shoulders , and carried him off .
then he got a long ladder and set it up against the squire ' s bed - room window , and so climbed up , and kept bobbing the dead man up and down , just for all the world like one that was peeping in at the window .
" that ' s the master thief , old lass !"
said the squire , and gave his wife a nudge on the side .
" now see if i don ' t shoot him , that ' s all .
" so saying , he took up a rifle , which he had laid at his bedside .
" no , no !
pray don ' t shoot him after telling him he might come and try ," said his wife .
" don ' t talk to me , for shoot him i will ," said he ; and so he lay there and aimed and aimed ; but as soon as the head came up before the window , and he saw a little of it , so soon was it down again .
at last he thought he had a good aim ; " bang " went the gun , down fell the dead body to the ground with a heavy thump , and down went the master thief too as fast as he could .
" well ," said the squire , " it is quite true that i am the chief magistrate in these parts ; but people are fond of talking , and it would be a bore if they came to see this dead man ' s body .
i think the best thing to be done is that i should go down and bury him .
"" you must do as you think best , dear ," said his wife .
so the squire got out of bed and went down - stairs , and he had scarce put his foot out of the door before the master thief stole in , and went straight upstairs to his wife .
" why , dear , back already !"
said she , for she thought it was her husband .
" o yes , i only just put him into a hole , and threw a little earth over him .
it is enough that he is out of sight , for it is such a bad night out of doors ; by and by i ' ll do it better .
but just let me have the sheet to wipe myself with — he was so bloody — and i have made myself in such a mess with him .
" so he got the sheet . after a while he said — " do you know i am afraid you must let me have your night - shift too , for the sheet won ' t do by itself ; that i can see .
" so she gave him the shift also .
but just then it came across his mind that he had forgotten to lock the house - door , so he must step down and look to that before he came back to bed , and away he went with both shift and sheet . a little while after came the true squire ." why !
what a time you ' ve taken to lock the door , dear !"
said his wife ; " and what have you done with the sheet and shift ?
"" what do you say ?"
said the squire .
" why , i am asking what you have done with sheet and shift that you had to wipe off the blood ," said she .
" what , in the deil ' s name !"
said the squire , " has he taken me in this time too ?
" next day came the master thief and asked for the squire ' s daughter , as he had given his word ; and then the squire dared not do anything else than give her to him , and a good lump of money into the bargain ; for , to tell the truth , he was afraid lest the master thief should steal the eyes out of his head , and that the people would begin to say spiteful things of him if he broke his word .
so master thief lived well and happily from that time forward .
i don ' t know whether he stole any more ; but if he did , i am quite sure it was only for the sake of a bit of fun .
