once on a time there was a man , who had to drive his sledge to the wood for fuel .
so a bear met him .
" out with your horse ," said the bear , " or i ' ll strike all your sheep dead by summer ."" oh !
heaven help me then ," said the man ; " there ' s not a stick of firewood in the house ; you must let me drive home a load of fuel , else we shall be frozen to death .
i ' ll bring the horse to you to - morrow morning .
" yes ; on those terms he might drive the wood home , that was a bargain ; but bruin said , " if he didn ' t come back , he should lose all his sheep by summer .
" so the man got the wood on the sledge and rattled homewards , but he wasn ' t over pleased at the bargain you may fancy .
so just then a fox met him .
" why , what ' s the matter ?"
said the fox ; " why are you so down in the mouth ?
"" oh , if you want to know ," said the man ; " i met a bear up yonder in the wood , and i had to give my word to him to bring dobbin back to - morrow , at this very hour for if he didn ' t get him , he said he would tear all my sheep to death by summer .
"" stuff , nothing worse than that ," said the fox ; " if you ' ll give me your fattest wether , i ' ll soon set you free ; see if i don ' t .
" yes ; the man gave his word , and swore he would keep it too .
" well , when you come with dobbin to - morrow for the bear ," said the fox , " i ' ll make a clatter up in that heap of stones yonder , and so when the bear asks what that noise is , you must say ' tis peter the marksman , who is the best shot in the world ; and after that you must help yourself .
" next day off set the man , and when he met the bear , something began to make a clatter up in the heap of stones ." hist !
what ' s that ?"
said the bear ." oh !
that ' s peter the marksman , to be sure ," said the man ; " he ' s the best shot in the world .
i know him by his voice .
"" have you seen any bears about here , eric ?"
shouted out a voice in the wood .
" say no !"
said the bear .
" no , i haven ' t seen any ," said eric .
" what ' s that then that stands alongside your sledge ?"
bawled out the voice in the wood .
" say it ' s an old fir - stump ," said the bear .
" oh , it ' s only an old fir - stump ," said the man .
" such fir - stumps we take in our country and roll them on our sledges ," bawled out the voice .
" if you can ' t do it yourself , i ' ll come and help you .
"" say you can help yourself , and roll me up on the sledge ," said the bear .
" no , thank ye , i can help myself well enough ," said the man , and rolled the bear on to the sledge .
" such fir - stumps we always bind fast on our sledges in our part of the world ," bawled out the voice ; " shall i come and help you ?
"" say you can help yourself , and bind me fast .
do ."
said the bear .
" no , thanks , i can help myself well enough ," said the man , who set to binding bruin fast with all the ropes he had , so that at last the bear couldn ' t stir a paw .
" such fir - stumps we always drive our axes into in our part of the world ," bawled out the voice ; " for then we guide them better going down the steep pitches .
"" pretend to drive your axe into me , do now ," said the bear . then the man took up his axe , and at one blow split the bear ' s skull , so that bruin lay dead in a trice , and so the man and the fox were great friends , and on the best terms .
but when they came near the farm , the fox said ,—" i ' ve no mind to go right home with you , for i can ' t say i like your tykes ; so i ' ll just wait here , and you can bring the wether to me , but mind and pick out one nice and fat .
" yes , the man would be sure to do that , and thanked the fox much for his help .
so when he had put up dobbin , he went across to the sheep - stall .
" whither away , now ?"
asked his old dame ." oh !"
said the man , " i ' m only going to the sheep - stall to fetch a fat wether for that cunning fox who set our dobbin free .
i gave him my word i would .
"" wether , indeed ," said the old dame ; " never a one shall that thief of a fox get .
haven ' t we got dobbin safe , and the bear into the bargain ; and as for the fox , i ' ll be bound he ' s stolen more of our geese than the wether is worth ; and even if he hasn ' t stolen them , he will .
no , no ; take a brace of your swiftest hounds in a sack , and slip them loose after him ; and then , perhaps , we shall be rid of this robbing reynard .
" well , the man thought that good advice ; so he took two fleet red hounds , put them into a sack , and set off with them .
" have you brought the wether ?"
said the fox .
" yes , come and take it ," said the man , as he untied the sack and let slip the hounds ." huf !"
said the fox , and gave a great spring ; " true it is what the old saw says , ' well done is often ill paid ;' and now , too , i see the truth of another saying , ' the worst foes are those of one ' s own house .'
" that was what the fox said as he ran off , and saw the red foxy hounds at his heels .
