once on a time there was a man , so surly and cross , he never thought his wife did anything right in the house .
so one evening , in hay - making time , he came home , scolding and swearing and showing his teeth and making a dust .
" dear love , don ' t be so angry ; there ' s a good man ," said his goody ; " to - morrow let ' s change our work .
i ' ll go out with the mowers and mow , and you shall mind the house at home .
" yes , the husband thought that would do very well .
he was quite willing , he said . so , early next morning , his goody took a scythe over her neck , and went out into the hay - field with the mowers and began to mow ; but the man was to mind the house , and do the work at home . first of all he wanted to churn the butter ; but when he had churned a while , he got thirsty , and went down to the cellar to tap a barrel of ale .
so , just when he had knocked in the bung , and was putting the tap into the cask , he heard overhead the pig come into the kitchen .
then off he ran up the cellar steps , with the tap in his hand , as fast as he could , to look after the pig , lest it should upset the churn ; but when he got up , and saw the pig had already knocked the churn over , and stood there , routing and grunting amongst the cream which was running all over the floor , he got so wild with rage that he quite forgot the ale - barrel , and ran at the pig , as hard as he could .
he caught it , too , just as it ran out of doors , and gave it such a kick that piggy lay for dead on the spot .
then all at once he remembered he had the tap in his hand ; but when he got down to the cellar , every drop of ale had run out of the cask . then he went into the dairy and found enough cream left to fill the churn again , and so he began to churn , for butter they must have at dinner .
when he had churned a bit , he remembered that their milking cow was still shut up in the byre , and hadn ' t had a bit to eat or a drop to drink all the morning , though the sun was high .
then all at once he thought ' twas too far to take her down to the meadow , so he ' d just get her up on the house - top — for the house , you must know , was thatched with sods , and a fine crop of grass was growing there .
now their house lay close up against a steep down , and he thought if he laid a plank across to the thatch at the back he ' d easily get the cow up . but still he couldn ' t leave the churn , for there was his little babe crawling about on the floor , and " if i leave it ," he thought , " the child is safe to upset it ."
so he took the churn on his back , and went out with it ; but then he thought , he ' d better first water the cow before he turned her out on the thatch ; so he took up a bucket to draw water out of the well ; but , as he stooped down at the well ' s brink , all the cream ran out of the churn over his shoulders , and so down into the well . now it was near dinner - time , and he hadn ' t even got the butter yet ; so he thought he ' d best boil the porridge , and filled the pot with water , and hung it over the fire .
when he had done that , he thought the cow might perhaps fall off the thatch and break her legs or her neck .
so he got up on the house to tie her up .
one end of the rope he made fast to the cow ' s neck , and the other he slipped down the chimney and tied round his own thigh ; and he had to make haste , for the water now began to boil in the pot , and he had still to grind the oatmeal . so he began to grind away ; but while he was hard at it , down fell the cow off the house top after all , and as she fell , she dragged the man up the chimney by the rope .
there he stuck fast ; and as for the cow , she hung , half - way down the wall , swinging between heaven and earth , for she could neither get down nor up . and now the goody had waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her husband to come and call them home to dinner ; but never a call they had .
at last she thought she ' d waited long enough , and went home .
but when she got there and saw the cow hanging in such an ugly place , she ran up and cut the rope in two with her scythe .
but as she did this , down came her husband out of the chimney ; and so when his old dame came inside the kitchen , there she found him standing on his head in the porridge - pot .
