once on a time there was a man and his wife , who had an only son , and his name was jack .
the old dame thought it high time for her son to go out into the world to learn a trade , and bade her husband be off with him .
" but all you do ," she said , " mind you bind him to some one who can teach him to be master above all masters ;" and with that she put some food and a roll of tobacco into a bag , and packed them off . well , they went to many masters ; but one and all said they could make the lad as good as themselves , but better they couldn ' t make him .
so when the man came home again to his wife with that answer , she said ,—" i don ' t care what you make of him ; but this i say and stick to , you must bind him to some one where he can learn to be master above all masters ;" and with that she packed up more food and another roll of tobacco , and father and son had to be off again . now when they had walked a while they got upon the ice , and there they met a man who came whisking along in a sledge , and drove a black horse .
" whither away ?"
said the man .
" well ," said the father , " i ' m going to bind my son to some one who is good to teach him a trade ; but my old dame comes of such fine folk , she will have him taught to be master above all masters .
"" well met then ," said the driver ; " i ' m just the man for your money , for i ' m looking out for such an apprentice .
up with you behind !"
he added to the lad , and whisk !
off they went , both of them , and sledge and horse , right up into the air .
" nay , nay !"
cried the lad ' s father , " you haven ' t told me your name , nor where you live ."" oh !"
said the master , " i ' m at home alike north and south , east and west , and my name ' s farmer weathersky .
in a year and a day you may come here again , and then i ' ll tell you if i like him ."
so away they went through the air , and were soon out of sight . so when the man got home , his old dame asked what had become of her son .
" well ," said the man , " heaven knows , i ' m sure i don ' t .
they went up aloft ;" and so he told her what had happened .
but when the old dame heard that her husband couldn ' t tell at all when her son ' s apprenticeship would be out , nor whither he had gone , she packed him off again , and gave him another bag of food and another roll of tobacco . so , when he had walked a bit , he came to a great wood , which stretched on and on all day as he walked through it .
when it got dark he saw a great light , and he went towards it .
after a long , long time he came to a little hut under a rock , and outside stood an old hag drawing water out of a well with her nose , so long was it .
" good evening , mother !"
said the man .
" the same to you ," said the old hag .
" it ' s hundreds of years since any one called me mother .
"" can i have lodging here to - night ?"
asked the man .
" no , that you can ' t ," said she . but then the man pulled out his roll of tobacco , lighted his pipe , and gave the old dame a whiff and a pinch of snuff .
then she was so happy she began to dance for joy , and the end was , she gave the man leave to stop the night . so next morning he began to ask after farmer weathersky .
" no , she never heard tell of him , but she ruled over all the four - footed beasts ; perhaps some of them might know him ."
so she played them all home with a pipe she had , and asked them all , but there wasn ' t one of them who knew anything about farmer weathersky .
" well ," said the old hag , " there are three sisters of us ; maybe one of the other two knows where he lives .
i ' ll lend you my horse and sledge , and then you ' ll beat her house by night ; but it ' s at least three hundred miles off , the nearest way .
" then the man started off , and at night reached the house , and when he came there , there stood another old hag before the door , drawing water out of the well with her nose .
" good evening , mother !"
said the man .
" the same to you ," said she ; " it ' s hundreds of years since any one called me mother .
"" can i lodge here to - night ?"
asked the man .
" no ," said the old hag . but he took out his roll of tobacco , lighted his pipe , and gave the old dame a whiff , and a good pinch of snuff besides on the back of her hand .
then she was so happy that she began to jump and dance for joy , and so the man got leave to stay the night .
when that was over , he began to ask after farmer weathersky .
" no , she had never heard tell of him ; but she ruled all the fish in the sea ; perhaps some of them might know something about him ."
so she played them all home with a pipe she had , and asked them , but there wasn ' t one of them who knew anything about farmer weathersky .
" well , well !"
said the old hag , " there ' s one sister of us left ; maybe she knows something about him .
she lives six hundred miles off , but i ' ll lend you my horse and sledge , and then you ' ll get there by nightfall .
" then the man started off , and reached the house by nightfall , and there he found another old hag who stood before the grate , and stirred the fire with her nose , so long and tough it was .
" good evening , mother !"
said the man .
" the same to you ," said the old hag ; " it ' s hundreds of years since any one called me mother .
"" can i lodge here to - night ?"
asked the man .
" no ," said the old hag . then the man pulled out his roll of tobacco again , and lighted his pipe , and gave the old hag such a pinch of snuff it covered the whole back of her hand .
then she got so happy she began to dance for joy , and so the man got leave to stay . but when the night was over , he began to ask after farmer weathersky .
she never heard tell of him , she said ; but she ruled over all the birds of the air , and so she played them all home with a pipe she had , and when she had mustered them all , the eagle was missing .
but a little while after he came flying home , and when she asked him , he said he had just come straight from farmer weathersky .
then the old hag said he must guide the man thither ; but the eagle said he must have something to eat first , and besides he must rest till the next day ; he was so tired with flying that long way , he could scarce rise from the earth . so when he had eaten his fill and taken a good rest , the old hag pulled a feather out of the eagle ' s tail , and put the man there in its stead ; so the eagle flew off with the man , and flew , and flew , but they didn ' t reach farmer weathersky ' s house before midnight . so when they got there , the eagle said ,—" there are heaps of dead bodies lying about outside , but you mustn ' t mind them .
inside the house every man jack of them are so sound asleep , ' twill be hard work to wake them ; but you must go straight to the table drawer , and take out of it three crumbs of bread , and when you hear some one snoring loud , pull three feathers out of his head ; he won ' t wake for all that .
" so the man did as he was told , and after he had taken the crumbs of bread , he pulled out the first feather ." oof !"
growled farmer weathersky , for it was he who snored . so the man pulled out another feather ." oof !"
he growled again . but when he pulled out the third , farmer weathersky roared so , the man thought roof and wall would have flown asunder , but for all that the snorer slept on . after that the eagle told him what he was to do .
he went to the yard , and there at the stable - door he stumbled against a big gray stone , and that he lifted up ; underneath it lay three chips of wood , and those he picked up too ; then he knocked at the stable - door , and it opened of itself .
then he threw down the three crumbs of bread , and a hare came and ate them up ; that hare he caught and kept .
after that the eagle bade him pull three feathers out of his tail , and put the hare , the stone , the chips , and himself there instead , and then he would fly away home with them all . so when the eagle had flown a long way , he lighted on a rock to rest .
" do you see anything ?"
it asked .
" yes ," said the man ; " i see a flock of crows coming flying after us .
"" we ' d better be off again , then ," said the eagle , who flew away .
after a while it asked again ,—" do you see anything now ?
"" yes ," said the man ; " now the crows are close behind us .
"" drop now the three feathers you pulled out of his head ," said the eagle . well , the man dropped the feathers , and as soon as ever he dropped them they became a flock of ravens which drove the crows home again .
then the eagle flew on far away with the man , and at last it lighted on another stone to rest .
" do you see anything ?"
it said .
" i ' m not sure ," said the man ; " i fancy i see something coming far far away .
"" we ' d better get on then ," said the eagle ; and after a while it said again —" do you see anything ?
"" yes ," said the man ; " now he ' s close at our heels .
"" now you must let fall the chips of wood which you took from under the gray stone at the stable door ," said the eagle . yes , the man let them fall , and they grew at once up into tall thick wood , so that farmer weathersky had to go back home to fetch an axe to hew his way through .
while he did this , the eagle flew ever so far , but when it got tired , it lighted on a fir to rest .
" do you see anything ?"
it said .
" well , i ' m not sure ," said the man ; " but i fancy i catch a glimpse of something far away .
"" we ' d best be off then ," said the eagle ; and off it flew as fast as it could .
after a while it said ,—" do you see anything now ?
"" yes ; now he ' s close behind us ," said the man .
" now , you must drop the big stone you lifted up at the stable door ," said the eagle . the man did so , and as it fell , it became a great high mountain , which farmer weathersky had to break his way through .
when he had got half through the mountain , he tripped and broke one of his legs , and so he had to limp home again and patch it up . but while he was doing this , the eagle flew away to the man ' s house with him and the hare , and as soon as they got home , the man went into the churchyard and sprinkled christian mould over the hare , and lo !
it turned into " jack ," his son . well , you may fancy the old dame was glad to get her son again , but still she wasn ' t easy in her mind about his trade , and she wouldn ' t rest till he gave her a proof that he was " master above all masters .
" so when the fair came round , the lad changed himself into a bay horse , and told his father to lead him to the fair .
" now , when any one comes ," he said , " to buy me , you may ask a hundred dollars for me ; but mind you don ' t forget to take the headstall off me ; if you do , farmer weathersky will keep me for ever , for he it is who will come to deal with you .
" so it turned out .
up came a horse - dealer , who had a great wish to deal for the horse , and he gave a hundred dollars down for him ; but when the bargain was struck , and jack ' s father had pocketed the money , the horse - dealer wanted to have the headstall .
" nay , nay !"
said the man , " there ' s nothing about that in the bargain ; and besides , you can ' t have the headstall , for i ' ve other horses at home to bring to town to - morrow .
" so each went his way , but they hadn ' t gone far before jack took his own shape and ran away , and when his father got home , there sat jack in the ingle . next day he turned himself into a brown horse , and told his father to drive him to the fair .
" and when any one comes to buy me , you may ask two hundred dollars for me — he ' ll give that and treat you besides : but whatever you do , and however much you drink , don ' t forget to take the headstall off me , else you ' ll never set eyes on me again .
" so all happened as he had said ; the man got two hundred dollars for the horse and a glass of drink besides , and when the buyer and seller parted , it was as much as he could do to remember to take off the headstall .
but , the buyer and the horse hadn ' t got far on the road before jack took his own shape , and when the man got home , there sat jack in the ingle . the third day it was the same story over again ; the lad turned himself into a black horse , and told his father some one would come and bid three hundred dollars for him , and fill his skin with meat and drink besides ; but however much he ate or drank , he was to mind and not forget to take the headstall off , else he ' d have to stay with farmer weathersky all his life long .
" no , no ; i ' ll not forget , never fear ," said the man . so when he came to the fair , he got three hundred dollars for the horse , and as it wasn ' t to be a dry bargain , farmer weathersky made him drink so much that he quite forgot to take the headstall off , and away went farmer weathersky with the horse .
now when he had gone a little way , farmer weathersky thought he would just stop and have another glass of brandy ; so he put a barrel of red - hot nails under his horse ' s nose , and a sieve of oats under his tail , hung the halter upon a hook , and went into the inn .
so the horse stood there , and stamped and pawed , and snorted and reared .
just then out came a lassie , who thought it a shame to treat a horse so .
" oh , poor beastie ," she said , " what a cruel master you must have to treat you so ," and as she said this she pulled the halter off the hook , so that the horse might turn round and taste the oats .
" i ' m after you ," roared farmer weathersky , who came rushing out of the door . but the horse had already shaken off the headstall , and jumped into a duck - pond , where he turned himself into a tiny fish .
in went farmer weathersky after him , and turned himself into a great pike .
then jack turned himself into a dove , and farmer weathersky made himself into a hawk , and chased and struck at the dove .
but just then a princess stood at the window of the palace and saw this struggle ." ah !
poor dove ," she cried , " if you only knew what i know , you ' d fly to me through this window .
" so the dove came flying in through the window and turned itself into jack again , who told his own tale .
" turn yourself into a gold ring , and put yourself on my finger ," said the princess .
" nay , nay !"
said jack , " that ' ll never do , for then farmer weathersky will make the king sick , and then there ' ll be no one who can make him well again till farmer weathersky comes and cures him , and then , for his fee , he ' ll ask for that gold ring .
"" then i ' ll say i had it from my mother , and can ' t part with it ," said the princess . well , jack turned himself into a gold ring , and put himself on the princess ' finger , and so farmer weathersky couldn ' t get at him .
but then followed what the lad had foretold ; the king fell sick , and there wasn ' t a doctor in the kingdom who could cure him till farmer weathersky came , and he asked for the ring off the princess ' finger for his fee .
so the king sent a messenger to the princess for the ring ; but the princess said she wouldn ' t part with it , her mother had left it her .
when the king heard that , he flew into a rage , and said he would have the ring , whoever left it to her .
" well ," said the princess , " it ' s no good being cross about it .
i can ' t get it off , and if you must have the ring , you must take my finger too .
"" if you ' ll let me try , i ' ll soon get the ring off ," said farmer weathersky .
" no , thanks , i ' ll try myself ," said the princess , and flew off to the grate and put ashes on her finger .
then the ring slipped off and was lost among the ashes .
so farmer weathersky turned himself into a cook , who scratched and pecked after the ring in the grate , till he was up to the ears in ashes .
but while he was doing this , jack turned himself into a fox , and bit off the cock ' s head , and so if the evil one was in farmer weathersky , it is all over with him now .
