once on a time there was a poor couple , and they had nothing in the world but three sons .
what the names the two elder had i can ' t say , but the youngest he was called peter .
so when their father and mother died , the sons were to share what was left , but there was nothing but a porridge - pot , a griddle , and a cat . the eldest , who was to have first choice , he took the pot ; " for ," said he , " whenever i lend the pot to any one to boil porridge , i can always get leave to scrape it .
" the second took the griddle ; " for ," said he , " whenever i lend it to any one , i ' ll always get a morsel of dough to make a bannock .
" but the youngest , he had no choice left him ; if he was to choose anything it must be the cat .
" well ," said he , " if i lend the cat to any one i shan ' t get much by that ; for if pussy gets a drop of milk , she ' ll want it all herself .
still , i ' d best take her along with me ; i shouldn ' t like her to go about here and starve .
" so the brothers went out into the world to try their luck , and each took his own way ; but when the youngest had gone a while , the cat said ,-" now you shall have a good turn , because you wouldn ' t let me stay behind in the old cottage and starve .
now , i ' m off to the wood to lay hold of a fine fat head of game , and then you must go up to the king ' s palace that you see yonder , and say you are come with a little present for the king ; and when he asks who sends it , you must say , ' why , who should it be from but lord peter ?
'" well , peter hadn ' t waited long before back came the cat with a reindeer from the wood ; she had jumped up on the reindeer ' s head , between his horns , and said , " if you don ' t go straight to the king ' s palace i ' ll claw your eyes out .
" so the reindeer had to go whether he liked it or no . and when peter got to the palace he went into the kitchen with the deer , and said ,- " here i ' m come with a little present for the king , if he won ' t despise it .
" then the king went out into the kitchen , and when he w the fine plump reindeer , he was very glad .
" but , my dear friend ," he said , " who in the world is it that sends me such a fine gift ?"" oh !"
said peter , " who should send it but lord peter .
"" lord peter !
lord peter !"
said the king .
" pray tell me where he lives ;" for he thought it a shame not to know so great a man .
but that was just what the lad wouldn ' t tell him ; he daren ' t do it , he said , because his master had forbidden him . so the king gave him a good bit of money to drink his health , and bade him be sure and say all kind of pretty things , and many thanks for the present to his master when he got home . next day the cat went again into the wood , and jumped up on a red - deer ' s head , and sat between his horns , and forced him to go to the palace .
then peter went again into the kitchen , and said he was come with a little present for the king , if he would be pleased to take it .
and the king was still more glad to get the red - deer than he had been to get the reindeer , and asked again who it was that sent so fine a present .
" why , it ' s lord peter , of course ," said the lad ; but when the king wanted to know where lord peter lived , he got the same answer as the day before ; and this day , too , he gave peter a good lump of money to drink his health with . the third day the cat came with an elk .
and so when peter got into the palace - kitchen , and said he had a little present for the king , if he ' d be pleased to take it , the king came out at once into the kitchen ; and when he saw the grand big elk , he was so glad he scarce knew which leg to stand on ; and this day , too , he gave peter many many more dollars - at least a hundred .
he wished now , once for all , to know where this lord peter lived , and asked and asked about this thing and that , but the lad said he daren ' t say , for his master ' s sake , who had strictly forbidden him to tell .
" well , then ," said the king , " beg lord peter to come and see me .
" yes , the lad would take that message ; but when peter got out into the yard again , and met the cat , he said ,-" a pretty scrape you ' ve got me into now , for here ' s the king , who wants me to come and see him , and you know i ' ve nothing to go in but these rags i stand and walk in .
"" oh , don ' t be afraid about that ," said the cat ; " in three days you shall have coach and horses , and fine clothes , so fine that the gold falls from them , and then you may go and see the king very well .
but mind , whatever you see in the king ' s palace , you must say you have far finer and grander things of your own .
don ' t forget that .
" no , no , peter would bear that in mind , never fear . so when three days were over , the cat came with a coach and horses , and clothes , and all that peter wanted , and altogether it was as grand as anything you ever set eyes on ; so off he set , and the cat ran alongside the coach .
the king met him well and graciously ; but whatever the king offered him , and whatever he showed him , peter said , twas all very well , but he had far finer and better things in his own house .
the king seemed not quite to believe this , but peter stuck to what he said , and at last the king got so angry , he couldn ' t bear it any longer .
" now i ' ll go home with you ," he said , " and see if it be true what you ' ve been telling me , that you have far finer and better things of your own .
but if you ' ve been telling a pack of lies , heaven help you , that ' s all i say .
"" now , you ' ve got me into a fine scrape ," said peter to the cat , " for here ' s the king coming home with me ; but my home , that ' s not so easy to find , i think ."" oh !
never mind ," said the cat ; " only do you drive after me as i run before .
" so off they set ; first peter , who drove after his cat , and then the king and all his court . but when they had driven a good bit , they came to a great flock of fine sheep , that had wool so long it almost touched the ground .
" if you ' ll only say ," said the cat to the shepherd , " this flock of sheep belongs to lord peter , when the king asks you , i ' ll give you this silver spoon ," which she hadtaken with her from the king ' s palace . yes , he was willing enough to do that .
so when the king came up , he said to the lad who watched the sheep ,-" well , i never saw so large and fine a flock of sheep in my life !
whose is it , my little lad ?
"" why ," said the lad , " whose should it be but lord peter ' s ?
" a little while after they came to a great , great herd of fine brindled kine , who were all so sleek the sun shone from them .
" if you ' ll only say ," said the cat to the neat - herd , " this herd is lord peter ' s , when the king asks you , i ' ll give you this silver ladle ;" and the ladle too she had taken from theking ' s palace .
" yes , with all my heart ," said the neat - herd . so when the king came up , he was quite amazed at the fine fat herd , for such a herd he had never seen before , and so he asked the neat - herd who owned those brindled kine .
" why , who should own them but lord peter ?"
said the neat - herd . so they went on a little farther , and came to a great , great drove of horses , the finest you ever saw , six of each colour , bay , and black , and brown , and chestnut .
" if you ' ll only say this drove of horses is lord peter ' s when the king asks you ," said the cat , " i ' ll give you this silver stoop ;" and the stoop too she had taken from the palace . yes , the lad was willing enough ; and so when the king came up , he was quite amazed at the grand drove of horses , for the matches of such horses he had never yet set eyes on , he said . so he asked the lad who watched them , whose all these blacks , and bays , and browns , and chestnuts were .
" whose should they be ," said the lad , " but lord peter ' s ?
" so when they had gone a good bit farther , they came to a castle ; first there was a gate of tin , and next a gate of silver , and next a gate of gold .
the castle itself was of silver , and so dazzling white , that it quite hurt one ' s eyes to look at in the sunbeams which fell on it just as they reached it . so they went into it , and the cat told peter to say this was his house .
as for the castle inside , it was far finer than it looked outside , for everything was pure gold ,- chairs , and tables , and benches , and all .
and when the king had gone all over it , and seen everything high and low , he got quite shameful and downcast .
" yes ," he said at last ; " lord peter has everything far finer than i have , there ' s no gainsaying that ," and so he wanted to be off home again . but peter begged him to stay to supper , and the king stayed , but he was sour and surly the whole time . so as they sat at supper , back came the troll who owned the castle , and gave such a great knock at the door .
" who ' s this eating my meat and drinking my mead like swine in here ?"
roared out the troll . as soon as the cat heard that , she ran down to the gate .
" stop a bit ," she said , " and i ' ll tell you how the farmer sets to work to get in his winter rye .
" and so she told him such a long story about the winter rye .
" first of all , you see , he ploughs his field , and then he dungs it , and then he ploughs it again , and then he harrows it ;" and so she went on till the sun rose .
" oh , do look behind you , and there you ' ll see such a lovely lady ," said the cat to the troll . so the troll turned round , and , of course , as soon as he saw the sun he burst .
" now all this is yours ," said the cat to lord peter .
" now , you must cut off my head ; that ' s all i ask for what i have done for you .
"" nay , nay ," said lord peter , " i ' ll never do any such thing , that ' s flat .
"" if you don ' t ," said the cat , " see if i don ' t claw your eyes out .
" well , so lord peter had to do it , though it was sore against his will .
he cut off the cat ' s head , but there and then she became the loveliest princess you ever set eyes on , and lord peter fell in love with her at once .
" yes , all this greatness was mine first ," said the princess , " but a troll bewitched me to be a cat in your father ' s and mother ' s cottage .
now you may do as you please , whether you take me as your queen or not , for you are now king over all this realm .
" well , well , there was little doubt lord peter would be willing enough to have her as his queen , and so there was a wedding that lasted eight whole days , and a feast besides , and after it was over i stayed no longer with lord peter and his lovely queen , and so i can ' t say anything more about them .
