once on a time there was a widower , who had a son and a daughter by his first marriage .
both were good children , and loved each other dearly .
some time after the man married a widow , who had a daughter by her first husband , and she was both ugly and bad , like her mother .
so from the day the new wife came into the house there was no peace for her stepchildren in any corner ; and at last the lad thought he ' d best go out into the world and try to earn his own bread .
and when he had wandered a while he came to a king ' s palace , and got a place under the coachman , and quick and willing he was , and the horses he looked after were so sleek and clean that their coats shone again . but the sister who stayed at home was treated worse than bad ; both her stepmother and stepsister were always at her , and wherever she went and whatever she did , they scolded and snarled so , the poor lassie hadn ' t an hour ' s peace .
all the hard work she was forced to do , and early and late she got nothing but bad words , and little food besides . so one day they had sent her to the burn to fetch water ; and what do you think ?
up popped an ugly , ugly head out of the pool , and said ,—" wash me , you lassie .
"" yes , with all my heart i ' ll wash you ," said the lassie . so she began to wash and scrub the ugly head ; but truth to say , she thought it nasty work . well , as soon as she had done washing it , up popped another head out of the pool , and this was uglier still .
" brush me , you lassie ," said the head .
" yes , with all my heart i ' ll brush you .
" and with that she took in hand the matted locks , and you may fancy she hadn ' t very pleasant work with them . but when she had got over that , if a third head didn ' t pop out of the pool , and this was far more ugly and loathsome than both the others put together .
" kiss me , you lassie !
"" yes , i ' ll kiss you ," said the lassie , and she did it too , though she thought it the worst thing she had ever had to do in her life . then the heads began to chatter together , and each asked what they should do for the lassie who was so kind and gentle .
" that she be the prettiest lassie in the world , and as fair as the bright day ," said the first head .
" that gold shall drop from her hair every time she brushes it ," said the second head .
" that gold shall fall from her mouth every time she speaks ," said the third head . so when the lassie came home looking so lovely , and beaming as the bright day itself , her stepmother and her stepsister got more and more cross , and they got worse still when she began to talk , and they saw how golden guineas fell from her mouth .
as for the stepmother , she got so mad with rage she chased the lassie into the pigsty .
that was the right place for all her gold stuff .
but as for coming into the house , she wouldn ' t hear of it . well , it wasn ' t long before the stepmother wished her own daughter to go to the burn to fetch water .
so when she came to the water ' s edge with her buckets , up popped the first head .
" wash me , you lassie ," it said .
" the deil wash you ," said the stepdaughter . so the second head popped up .
" brush me , you lassie ," it said .
" the deil brush you ," said the stepdaughter . so down it went to the bottom , and the third head popped up .
" kiss me , you lassie ," said the head .
" the deil kiss you , you pig ' s - snout ," said the girl . then the heads chattered together again , and asked what they should do to the girl who was so spiteful and cross - grained ; and they all agreed she should have a nose four ells long , and a snout three ells long , and a pine - bush right in the midst of her forehead , and every time she spoke , ashes were to fall out of her mouth . so when she got home with her buckets , she bawled out to her mother —" open the door .
"" open it yourself , my darling child ," said the mother .
" i can ' t reach it because of my nose ," said the daughter . so when the mother came out and saw her , you may fancy what a way she was in , and how she screamed and groaned ; but for all that there were the nose and the snout and the pine - bush , and they got no smaller for all her grief . now the brother , who had got the place in the king ' s stable , had taken a little sketch of his sister , which he carried away with him , and every morning and every evening he knelt down before the picture and prayed to our lord for his sister , whom he loved so dearly .
the other grooms had heard him praying , so they peeped through the key - hole of his room , and there they saw him on his knees before the picture .
so they went about saying how the lad every morning and every evening knelt down and prayed to an idol which he had , and at last they went to the king himself and begged him only to peep through the key - hole , and then his majesty would see the lad , and what things he did .
at first the king wouldn ' t believe it , but at last they talked him over , and he crept on tiptoe to the door and peeped in .
yes , there was the lad on his knees before the picture , which hung on the wall , praying with clasped hands .
" open the door !"
called out the king , but the lad didn ' t hear him . so the king called out in a louder voice , but the lad was so deep in his prayers he couldn ' t hear him this time either .
" open the door , i say !"
roared out the king ; " it ' s i , the king , who want to come in .
" well , up jumped the lad and ran to the door and unlocked it , but in his hurry he forgot to hide the picture . but when the king came in and saw the picture , he stood there as if he were fettered , and couldn ' t stir from the spot , so lovely he thought the picture .
" so lovely a woman there isn ' t in all the wide world ," said the king . but the lad told him she was his sister he had drawn , and if she wasn ' t prettier than that , at least she wasn ' t uglier .
" well , if she ' s so lovely ," said the king , " i ' ll have her for my queen "; and then he ordered the lad to set off home that minute , and not be long on the road either .
so the lad promised to make as much haste as he could , and started off from the king ' s palace . when the brother came home to fetch his sister , the stepmother and stepsister said they must go too .
so they all set out , and the good lassie had a casket in which she kept her gold , and a little dog , whose name was " little flo ;" those two things were all her mother left her .
and when they had gone awhile , they came to a lake which they had to cross ; so the brother sat down at the helm , and the stepmother and the two girls sat in the bow foreward , and so they sailed a long , long way . at last they caught sight of land .
" there ," said the brother , " where you see the white strand yonder , there ' s where we ' re to land "; and as he said this he pointed across the water .
" what is it my brother says ?"
asked the good lassie .
" he says you must throw your casket overboard ," said the stepmother .
" well , when my brother says it , i must do it ," said the lassie , and overboard went the casket . when they had sailed a bit farther , the brother pointed again across the lake .
" there you see the castle we ' re going to .
"" what is it my brother says ?"
asked the lassie .
" he says now you must throw your little dog overboard ," said the stepmother . then the lassie wept and was sore grieved , for little flo was the dearest thing she had in the world , but at last she threw him overboard .
" when my brother says it , i must do it , but heaven knows how it hurts me to throw you over , little flo ," she said . so they sailed on a good bit still .
" there you see the king coming down to meet us ," said the brother , and pointed towards the strand .
" what is it my brother says ?"
asked the lassie .
" now he says you must make haste and throw yourself overboard ," said the stepmother . well , the lassie wept and moaned ; but when her brother told her to do that , she thought she ought to do it , so she leapt down into the lake . but when they came to the palace , and the king saw the loathly bride , with a nose four ells long , and a snout three ells long , and a pine - bush in the midst of her forehead , he was quite scared out of his wits ; but the wedding was all ready , both in brewing and baking , and there sat all the wedding guests waiting for the bride ; so the king couldn ' t help himself , but was forced to take her for better for worse .
but angry he was that anyone can forgive him , so he had the brother thrown into a pit full of snakes . well , the first thursday evening after the wedding , about midnight , in came a lovely lady into the palace - kitchen , and begged the kitchen - maid , who slept there , so prettily to lend her a brush .
that she got , and then she brushed her hair , and as she brushed , down dropped gold .
a little dog was at her heel , and to him she said ,—" run out , little flo , and see if it will soon be day .
" this she said three times , and the third time she sent the dog it was just about the time the dawn begins to peep .
then she had to go , but as she went she sang ,—" out on you , ugly bushy bride , lying so warm by the king ' s left side ; while i on sand and gravel sleep , and over my brothers adders creep , and all without a tear .
"" now i come twice more , and then never again .
" so next morning the kitchen - maid told what she had seen and heard , and the king said he ' d watch himself next thursday night in the kitchen , and see if it were true , and as soon as it got dark , out he went into the kitchen to the kitchen - maid .
but all he could do , and however much he rubbed his eyes and tried to keep himself awake , it was no good ; for the bushy bride chaunted and sang till his eyes closed , and so when the lovely lady came , there he slept and snored .
this time , too , as before , she borrowed a brush , and brushed her hair till the gold dropped , and sent her dog out three times , and as soon as it was grey dawn , away she went singing the same words , and adding ,—" now i come once more , and then never again .
" the third thursday evening the king said he would watch again ; and he set two men to hold him , one under each arm , who were to shake and jog him every time he wanted to fall asleep ; and two men he set to watch his bushy bride .
but when the night wore on , the bushy bridge began to chaunt and sing , so that his eyes began to wink , and his head hung down on his shoulders .
then in came the lovely lady and got the brush and brushed her hair , till the gold dropped from it ; after that she sent little flo out again to see if it would soon be day , and this she did three times .
the third time it began to get grey in the east ; then she sang —" out on you , ugly bushy bride , lying so warm by the king ' s left side ; while i on sand and gravel sleep , and over my brothers adders creep , and all without a tear .
"" now i come back never more ," she said , and went towards the door .
but the two men who held the king under the arms clenched his hands together , and put a knife into his grasp , and so somehow or other , they got him to cut her in her little finger , and drew blood .
then the true bride was freed , and the king woke up , and she told him now the whole story , and how her stepmother and sister had deceived her .
so the king sent at once and took her brother out of the pit of snakes , and the adders hadn ' t done him the least harm , but the stepmother and her daughter were thrown into it in his stead . and now no one can tell how glad the king was to be rid of that ugly bushy bride , and to get a queen who was as lovely and bright as the day itself .
so the true wedding was held , and everyone talked of it over seven kingdoms ; and the king drove to church in their coach , and little flo went inside with them too , and when the blessing was given they drove back again , and after that i saw nothing more of them .
