once on a time there was a man who had three sons , peter , paul , and john .
john was boots , of course , because he was the youngest .
i can ' t say the man had anything more than these three sons , for he hadn ' t one penny to rub against another ; and so he told his sons over and over again they must go out into the world and try to earn their bread , for there at home there was nothing to be looked for but starving to death . now , a bit off the man ' s cottage was the king ' s palace , and you must know , just against the king ' s windows a great oak had sprung up , which was so stout and big , that it took away all the light from the king ' s palace .
the king had said he would give many , many dollars to the man who could fell the oak , but no one was man enough for that , for as soon as ever one chip of the oak ' s trunk flew off , two grew in its stead .
a well , too , the king had dug , which was to hold water for the whole year ; for all his neighbours had wells , but he hadn ' t any , and that he thought a shame .
so the king said he would give any one who could dig him such a well as would hold water for a whole year round , both money and goods ; but no one could do it , for the king ' s palace lay high , high up on a hill , and they hadn ' t dug a few inches before they came upon the living rock . but as the king had set his heart on having these two things done , he had it given out far and wide , in all the churches of his kingdom , that he who could fell the big oak in the king ' s courtyard , and get him a well that would hold water the whole year round , should have the princess and half the kingdom .
well , you may easily know there was many a man who came to try his luck ; but for all their hacking and hewing , and all their digging and delving , it was no good .
the oak got bigger and stouter at every stroke , and the rock didn ' t get softer either .
so one day those three brothers thought they ' d set off and try too , and their father hadn ' t a word against it ; for even if they didn ' t get the princess and half the kingdom , it might happen they might get a place somewhere with a good master ; and that was all he wanted .
so when the brothers said they thought of going to the palace , their father said " yes " at once .
so peter , paul , and jack went off from their home . well , they hadn ' t gone far before they came to a fir - wood , and up along one side of it rose a steep hill - side , and as they went , they heard something hewing and hacking away up on the hill among the trees .
" i wonder now what it is that is hewing away up yonder ," said jack .
" you ' re always so clever with your wonderings ," said peter and paul both at once .
" what wonder is it , pray , that a woodcutter should stand and hack up on a hill - side ?
"" still , i ' d like to see what it is , after all ," said jack ; and up he went .
" oh , if you ' re such a child , ' twill do you good to go and take a lesson ," bawled out his brothers after him . but jack didn ' t care for what they said ; he climbed the steep hill - side towards where the noise came , and when he reached the place , what do you think he saw ?
why , an axe that stood there hacking and hewing , all of itself , at the trunk of a fir .
" good day !"
said jack .
" so you stand here all alone and hew , do you ?
"" yes ; here i ' ve stood and hewed and hacked a long , long time , waiting for you ," said the axe .
" well , here i am at last ," said jack , as he took the axe , pulled it off its haft , and stuffed both head and haft into his wallet . so when he got down again to his brothers , they began to jeer and laugh at him .
" and now , what funny thing was it you saw up yonder on the hill - side ?"
they said .
" oh , it was only an axe we heard ," said jack . so when they had gone a bit farther , they came under a steep spur of rock , and up there they heard something digging and shovelling .
" i wonder now ," said jack , " what it is digging and shovelling , up yonder at the top of the rock .
"" ah , you ' re always so clever with your wonderings ," said peter and paul again , " as if you ' d never heard a woodpecker hacking and pecking at a hollow tree .
"" well , well ," said jack , " i think it would be a piece of fun just to see what it really is .
" and so off he set to climb the rock , while the others laughed and made game of him .
but he didn ' t care a bit for that ; up he clomb , and when he got near the top , what do you think he saw ?
why , a spade that stood there , digging and delving .
" good day !"
said jack .
" so you stand here all alone , and dig and delve !
"" yes , that ' s what i do ," said the spade , " and that ' s what i ' ve done this many a long day , waiting for you .
"" well , here i am ," said jack again , as he took the spade and knocked it off its handle , and put it into his wallet , and then down again to his brothers .
" well , what was it , so rare and strange ," said peter and paul , " that you saw up there at the top of the rock ?
"" oh ," said jack , " nothing more than a spade ; that was what we heard .
" so they went on again a good bit , till they came to a brook .
they were thirsty , all three , after their long walk , and so they lay down beside the brook to have a drink .
" i wonder now ," said jack , " where all this water comes from .
"" i wonder if you ' re right in your head ," said peter and paul in one breath .
" if you ' re not mad already , you ' ll go mad very soon , with your wonderings .
where the brook comes from , indeed !
have you never heard how water rises from a spring in the earth ?
"" yes ; but still i ' ve a great fancy to see where this brook comes from ," said jack . so up alongside the brook he went , in spite of all that his brothers bawled after him .
nothing could stop him .
on he went .
so , as he went up and up , the brook got smaller and smaller , and at last , a little way farther on , what do you think he saw ?
why , a great walnut , and out of that the water trickled ." good - day !"
said jack again .
" so you lie here , and trickle and run down all alone ?
"" yes , i do ," said the walnut ; " and here have i trickled and run this many a long day , waiting for you .
"" well , here i am ," said jack , as he took up a lump of moss , and plugged up the hole , that the water mightn ' t run out .
then he put the walnut into his wallet , and ran down to his brothers .
" well , now ," said peter and paul , " have you found out where the water comes from ?
a rare sight it must have been !
"" oh , after all , it was only a hole it ran out of ," said jack ; and so the others laughed and made game of him again , but jack didn ' t mind that a bit .
" after all , i had the fun of seeing it ," said he . so when they had gone a bit farther , they came to the king ' s palace ; but as every one in the kingdom had heard how they might win the princess and half the realm , if they could only fell the big oak and dig the king ' s well , so many had come to try their luck that the oak was now twice as stout and big as it had been at first , for two chips grew for every one they hewed out with their axes , as i daresay you all bear in mind .
so the king had now laid it down as a punishment , that if any one tried and couldn ' t fell the oak , he should be put on a barren island , and both his ears were to be clipped off .
but the two brothers didn ' t let themselves be scared by that ; they were quite sure they could fell the oak , and peter , as he was eldest , was to try his hand first ; but it went with him as with all the rest who had hewn at the oak ; for every chip he cut out , two grew in its place .
so the king ' s men seized him , and clipped off both his ears , and put him out on the island . now paul , he was to try his luck , but he fared just the same ; when he had hewn two or three strokes , they began to see the oak grow , and so the king ' s men seized him too , and clipped his ears , and put him out on the island ; and his ears they clipped closer , because they said he ought to have taken a lesson from his brother . so now jack was to try .
" if you will look like a marked sheep , we ' re quite ready to clip your ears at once , and then you ' ll save yourself some bother ," said the king , for he was angry with him for his brothers ' sake .
" well , i ' d like just to try first ," said jack , and so he got leave .
then he took his axe out of his wallet ; and fitted it to its haft .
" hew away !"
said he to his axe ; and away it hewed , making the chips fly again , so that it wasn ' t long before down came the oak . when that was done , jack pulled out his spade , and fitted it to its handle .
" dig away !"
said he to the spade ; and so the spade began to dig and delve till the earth and rock flew out in splinters , and so he had the well soon dug out , you may think . and when he had got it as big and deep as he chose , jack took out his walnut and laid it in one corner of the well , and pulled the plug of moss out .
" trickle and run ," said jack ; and so the nut trickled and ran , till the water gushed out of the hole in a stream , and in a short time the well was brimfull . then jack had felled the oak which shaded the king ' s palace , and dug a well in the palace - yard , and so he got the princess and half the kingdom , as the king had said ; but it was lucky for peter and paul that they had lost their ears , else they had heard each hour and day how every one said , " well , after all , jack wasn ' t so much out of his mind when he took to wondering ."
