once on a time there were two brothers , both named peter , and so the older was called big peter , and the younger little peter .
when his father was dead , big peter took him a wife with lots of money , but little peter was at home with his mother , and lived on her means till he grew up .
so when he was of age he came into his heritage , and then big peter said he mustn ' t stay any longer in the old house , and eat up his mother ' s substance ; ' twere better he should go out into the world and do something for himself . yes ; little peter thought that no bad plan ; so he bought himself a fine horse and a load of butter and cheese , and set off to the town ; and with the money he got for his goods he bought brandy , and wine , and beer , and as soon as ever he got home again it was one round of holiday - keeping and merry - making ; he treated all his old friends and neighbours , and they treated him again ; and so he lived in fun and frolic so long as his money lasted .
but when his last shilling was spent , and little peter hadn ' t a penny in his purse , he went back home again to his old mother , and brought nothing with him but a calf .
when the spring came he turned out the calf and let it graze on big peter ' s meadow .
then big peter got cross and killed the calf at one blow ; but little peter , he flayed the calf , and hung the skin up in the bath - room till it was thoroughly dry ; then he rolled it up , stuffed it into a sack , and went about the country trying to sell it ; but wherever he came , they only laughed at him , and said they had no need of smoked calfskin .
so when he had walked on a long way , he came to a farm , and there he turned in and asked for a night ' s lodging .
" nay , nay ," said the goody , " i can ' t give you lodging , for my husband is up at the shieling on the hill , and i ' m alone in the house .
you must just try to get shelter at our next neighbour ' s ; but still if they won ' t take you in , you may come back , for you must have a house over your head , come what may .
" so as little peter passed by the parlour window , he saw that there was a priest in there , with whom the goody was making merry , and she was serving him up ale and brandy , and a great bowl of custard .
but just as the priest had sat down to eat and drink , back came the husband , and as soon as ever the goody heard him in the passage , she was not slow ; she took the bowl of custard , and put it under the kitchen grate , and the ale and brandy into the cellar , and as for the priest , she locked him up in a great chest which stood there .
all this little peter stood outside and saw , and as soon as the husband was well inside , little peter went up to the door and asked if he might have a night ' s lodging .
" yes , to be sure ," said the man , " we ' ll take you in ;" and so he begged little peter to sit down at the table and eat .
yes , little peter sat down , and took his calfskin with him , and laid it down at his feet . so , when they had sat a while , little peter began to mutter to his skin .
" what are you saying now ?
can ' t you hold your tongue ?"
said little peter .
" who is it you ' re talking with ?"
asked the man .
" oh ," answered little peter , " it ' s only a spae - maiden whom i ' ve got in my calfskin .
"" and pray what does she spae ?"
asked the man again .
" why , she says that no one can say there isn ' t a bowl of custard standing under the grate ," said little peter .
" she may spae as much as she pleases ," answered the man , " but we haven ' t had custards in this house for a year and a day .
" but peter begged him only to look , and he did so ; and he found the custard - bowl .
so they began to make merry with it , but just as they sat and took their ease , peter muttered something again to the calfskin ." hush !"
he said , " can ' t you hold your jaw ?
"" and pray what does the spae - maiden say now ?"
asked the man .
" oh , she says no one can say there isn ' t brandy and ale standing just under the trap - door which goes down into the cellar ," answered peter .
" well , if she never spaed wrong in her life , she spaes wrong now ," said the man .
" brandy and ale !
why , i can ' t call to mind the day when we had such things in the house !
"" just look ," said peter ; and the man did so , and there , sure enough , he found the drink , and you may fancy how merry and jolly he was .
" what did you give for that spae - maiden ?"
said the man , " for i must have her , whatever you ask for her .
"" she was left me by my father ," said peter , " and so she didn ' t cost me much .
to tell you the truth , i ' ve no great mind to part with her , but , all the same , you may have her , if you ' ll let me have , instead of her , that old chest that stands in the parlour yonder .
"" the chest ' s locked and the key lost ," screamed the old dame .
" then i ' ll take it without the key , that i will ," said peter . and so he and the man soon struck the bargain .
peter got a rope instead of the key , and the man helped him to get the chest up on his back , and then off he stumped with it .
so when he had walked a bit he came on to a bridge , and under the bridge ran a river in such a headlong stream , it leapt , and foamed , and made such a roar , that the bridge shook again ." ah !"
said peter , " that brandy — that brandy !
now i can feel i ' ve had a drop too much .
what ' s the good of my dragging this chest about ?
if i hadn ' t been drunk and mad , i shouldn ' t have gone and swopped away my spae - maiden for it .
but now this chest shall go out into the river this very minute .
" and with that he began to untie the rope ." au !
au !
do for god ' s sake set me free .
the priest ' s life is at stake ; he it is whom you have got in the chest ," screamed out some one inside .
" this must be the deil himself ," said peter , " who wants to make me believe he has turned priest ; but whether he makes himself priest or clerk , out he goes into the river .
"" oh , no !
oh no !"
roared out the priest .
" the parish priest is at stake .
he was on a visit to the goody for her soul ' s health , but her husband is rough and wild , and so she had to hide me in the chest .
here i have a gold watch and a silver watch in my fob ; you shall have them both , and eight hundred dollars beside , if you will only let me out .
"" nay , nay ," said peter ; " is it really your reverence after all ?"
and with that he took up a stone , and knocked the lid of the chest to pieces .
then the priest got out , and off he set home to his parsonage both fast and light , for he no longer had his watches and money to weigh him down . as for little peter , he went home again , and said to big peter , " there was a good sale to - day for calfskins at the market .
"" why , what did you get for your tattered one , now ?"
asked big peter .
" quite as much as it was worth .
i got eight hundred dollars for it , but bigger and stouter calves ' skins fetched twice as much ," said little peter , and showed his dollars ."
' twas well you told me this ," answered big peter , who went and slaughtered all his kine and calves , and set off on the road to town with their skins and hides .
so when he got to the market , and the tanners asked what he wanted for his hides , big peter said he must have eight hundred dollars for the small ones , and so on , more and more , for the big ones .
but all the folk only laughed and made game of him , and said he oughtn ' t to come there ; he ' d better turn into the madhouse for a better bargain , and so he soon found out how things had gone , and that little peter had played himi a trick .
but when he got home again he was not very soft - spoken , and he swore and cursed ; so help him , if he wouldn ' t strike little peter dead that very night .
all this little peter stood and listened to ; and so , when he had gone to bed with his mother , and the night had worn on a little , he begged her to change sides with him , for he was well - nigh frozen , he said , and might be ' twas warmer next the wall .
yes , she did that , and in a little while came big peter with an axe in his hand , and crept up to the bedside , and at one blow chopped off his mother ' s head . next morning , in went little peter into big peter ' s sitting - room .
" heaven better and help you ," he said ; " you who have chopped our mother ' s head off .
the sheriff will not be over - pleased to hear that you pay mother ' s dower in this way .
" then big peter got so afraid , be begged little peter , for god ' s sake , to say nothing about what he knew .
if he would only do that , he should have eight hundred dollars . well , little peter swept up the money ; set his mother ' s head on her body again ; put her on a hand - sledge , and so drew her to market .
there he set her up with an apple - basket on each arm , and an apple in each hand .
by and by came a skipper walking along ; he thought she was an apple - woman , and asked if she had apples to sell , and how many he might have for a penny .
but the old woman made no answer .
so the skipper asked again .
no !
she hadn ' t a word to say for herself .
" how many may i have for a penny ?"
he bawled the third time , but the old dame sat bolt upright , as though she neither saw him nor heard what he said .
then the skipper flew into such a rage that he gave her one under the ear , and so away rolled her head across the market - place .
at that moment , up came little peter with a bound ; he fell a - weeping and bewailing , and threatened to make the skipper smart for it , for having dealt his old mother her death - blow .
" dear friend , only hold your tongue about what you know ," said the skipper , " and you shall have eight hundred dollars .
" and so they made it up . when little peter got home again , he said to big peter ,—" old women fetch a fine price at market to - day ; i got eight hundred dollars for mother ; just look ," and so he showed him the money ."
' twas well i came to know this ," said big peter . now you must know he had an old stepmother , so he took and killed her out of hand , and strode off to sell her .
but when they heard how he went about trying to sell dead bodies , the neighbours were all for handing him over to the sheriff , and it was as much as he could do to get out of the scrape . when big peter got home again , he was so wroth and mad against little peter , he threatened to strike him dead there and then ; he needn ' t hope for mercy , die he must .
" well , well ," said little peter , " that ' s the way we must all trudge , and betwixt to - day and to - morrow there ' s only a night to come .
but if i must set off now , i ' ve only one thing to ask ; stuff me into that sack that hangs yonder , and take and toss me into the river .
" well , big peter had nothing to say against that ; he stuffed him into the sack , and set off .
but he hadn ' t gone far on his way before it came into his mind that he had forgotten something which he must go back to fetch ; meanwhile , he set the sack down by the road - side .
just then came a man driving a fine fat flock of sheep ," to kingdom - come , to paradise ; to kingdom - come , to paradise ," roared out little peter , who lay inside the sack , and that he kept bawling and bellowing out .
" mayn ' t i get leave to go with you ?"
asked the man who drove the sheep .
" of course you may ," said little peter .
" if you ' ll only untie the sack , and creep into it in my stead , you ' ll soon get there .
as for me , i don ' t mind biding here till next time , that i don ' t .
but you must keep on calling out the words i bawled out , else you ' ll not go to the right place .
" then the man untied the sack , and got into it in little peter ' s place : peter tied the sack up again , and the man began to bawl out ,—" to kingdom - come , to paradise ; to kingdom - come , to paradise ;" and to that text he stuck . when peter had got him well into the sack , he wasn ' t slow ; off he went with the flock of sheep , and soon put a good bit of the road behind him .
meantime , back came big peter , took the sack on his shoulders , and bore it across the country to the river , and all the while he went , the drover sat inside bawling out ,—" to kingdom - come , to paradise ; to kingdom - come , to paradise ;"" ay , ay ," said big peter ; " try now to find the way for yourself ;" and with that he tossed him out into the stream . so when big peter had done that , and was going back home , whom should he overtake but his brother , who went along driving the flock of sheep before him .
big peter could scarce believe his eyes , and asked how little peter had got out of the river , and whence the fine flock of sheep came ." ah !"
said little peter , " that just was a good brotherly turn you did me when you threw me into the river .
i sank right down to the bottom like a stone , and there i just did see flocks of sheep ; you ' d scarce believe now , that they go about down there by thousands , one flock bigger than the other .
and just look here !
here are fleeces for you !
"" well ," said big peter , " i ' m very glad you told me .
" so off he ran home to his old dame ; made her come with him to the river ; crept into a sack , and bade her make haste to tie it up , and toss him over the bridge .
" i ' m going after a flock of sheep ," he said , " but if i stay too long , and you think i can ' t get along with the flock by myself , just jump over and help me ; do you hear ?
"" well , don ' t stay too long ," said his wife , " for my heart is set on seeing those sheep .
" there she stood and waited a while , but then she thought perhaps her husband couldn ' t keep the flock well together , and so down she jumped after him . and so little peter was rid of them all , and the farm and fields came to him as heir , and horses and cattle too ; and , besides , he had money in his pocket to buy milk kine to tether in his byre .
