once on a time there was a king and a queen who had no children , and that gave the queen much grief ; she scarce had one happy hour .
she was always bewailing and bemoaning herself , and saying how dull and lonesome it was in the palace .
" if we had children there ' d be life enough ," she said . wherever she went in all her realm she found god ' s blessing in children , even in the vilest hut ; and wherever she came she heard the goodies scolding the bairns , and saying how they had done that and that wrong .
all this the queen heard , and thought it would be so nice to do as other women did .
at last the king and queen took into their palace a stranger lassie to rear up , that they might have her always with them , to love her if she did well , and scold her if she did wrong , like their own child . so one day the little lassie whom they had taken as their own , ran down into the palace - yard , and was playing with a gold apple .
just then an old beggar wife came by , who had a little girl with her , and it wasn ' t long before the little lassie and the beggar ' s bairn were great friends , and began to play together , and to toss the gold apple about between them .
when the queen saw this , as she sat at a window in the palace , she tapped on the pane for her foster - daughter to come up .
she went at once , but the beggar - girl went up too and as they went into the queen ' s bower , each held the other by the hand .
then the queen began to scold the little lady , and to say ,—" you ought to be above running about and playing with a tattered beggar ' s brat .
" and so she wanted to drive the lassie down - stairs .
" if the queen only knew my mother ' s power , she ' d not drive me out ," said the little lassie ; and when the queen asked what she meant more plainly , she told her how her mother could get her children if she chose .
the queen wouldn ' t believe it , but the lassie held her own , and said every word of it was true , and bade the queen only to try and make her mother do it .
so the queen sent the lassie down to fetch up her mother .
" do you know what your daughter says ?"
asked the queen of the old woman , as soon as ever she came into the room . no ; the beggar - wife knew nothing about it .
" well , she says you can get me children if you will ," answered the queen .
" queens shouldn ' t listen to beggar lassies ' silly stories ," said the old wife , and strode out of the room . then the queen got angry , and wanted again to drive out the little lassie ; but she declared it was true every word that she had said .
" let the queen only give my mother a drop to drink ," said the lassie ; " when she gets merry she ' ll soon find out a way to help you .
" the queen was ready to try this ; so the beggar wife was fetched up again once more , and treated both with wine and mead as much as she chose ; and so it was not long before her tongue began to wag .
then the queen came out again with the same question she had asked before .
" one way to help you perhaps i know ," said the beggar wife .
" your majesty must make them bring in two pails of water some evening before you go to bed .
in each of them you must wash yourself , and afterwards throw away the water under the bed .
when you look under the bed next morning , two flowers will have sprung up , one fair and one ugly .
the fair one you must eat , the ugly one you must let stand ; but mind you don ' t forget the last .
" that was what the beggar wife said . yes ; the queen did what the beggar wife advised her to do ; she had the water brought up in two pails , washed herself in them , and emptied them under the bed ; and lo !
when she looked under the bed next morning , there stood two flowers ; one was ugly and foul , and had black leaves ; but the other was so bright , and fair , and lovely , she had never seen its like ; so she ate it up at once .
but the pretty flower tasted so sweet , that she couldn ' t help herself .
she ate the other up too , for , she thought , " it can ' t hurt or help one much either way , i ' ll be bound .
" well , sure enough , after a while the queen was brought to bed .
first of all , she had a girl who had a wooden spoon in her hand , and rode upon a goat ; loathly and ugly she was , and the very moment she came into the world she bawled out " mamma .
"" if i ' m your mamma ," said the queen , " god give me grace to mend my ways .
"" oh , don ' t be sorry ," said the girl , who rode on the goat , " for one will soon come after me who is better looking .
" so , after a while , the queen had another girl , who was so fair and sweet , no one had ever set eyes on such a lovely child , and with her you may fancy the queen was very well pleased .
the elder twin they called " tatterhood ," because she was always so ugly and ragged , and because she had a hood which hung about her ears in tatters .
the queen could scarce bear to look at her , and the nurses tried to shut her up in a room by herself , but it was all no good ; where the younger twin was , there she must also be , and no one could ever keep them apart . well , one christmas eve , when they were half grown up , there rose such a frightful noise and clatter in the gallery outside the queen ' s bower .
so tatterhood asked what it was that dashed and crashed so out in the passage ." oh !"
said the queen , " it isn ' t worth asking about .
"' but tatterhood wouldn ' t give over till she found out all about it ; and so the queen told her it was a pack of trolls , and witches who had come there to keep christmas .
so tatterhood said she ' d just go out and drive them away ; and in spite of all they could say , and however much they begged and prayed her to let the trolls alone , she must and would go out to drive the witches off ; but she begged the queen to mind and keep all the doors close shut , so that not one of them came so much as the least bit ajar .
having said this , off she went with her wooden spoon , and began to hunt and sweep away the hags ; and all this while there was such a pother out in the gallery , the like of it was never heard .
the whole palace creaked and groaned as if every joint and beam were going to be torn out of its place .
now , how it was , i ' m sure i can ' t tell ; but somehow or other one door did get the least bit ajar , then her twin sister just peeped out to see how things were going with tatterhood , and put her head a tiny bit through the opening .
but , pop !
up came an old witch , and whipped off her head , and stuck a calf ' s head on her shoulders instead ; and so the princess ran back into the room on all - fours , and began to " moo " like a calf .
when tatterhood came back and saw her sister , she scolded them all round , and was very angry because they hadn ' t kept better watch , and asked them what they thought of their heedlessness now , when her sister was turned into a calf .
" but still i ' ll see if i can ' t set her free ," she said . then she asked the king for a ship in full trim , and well fitted with stores ; but captain and sailors she wouldn ' t have .
no ; she would sail away with her sister all alone ; and as there was no holding her back , at last they let her have her own way . then tatterhood sailed off , and steered her ship right under the land where the witches dwelt , and when she came to the landing - place , she told her sister to stay quite still on board the ship ; but she herself rode on her goat up to the witches ' castle .
when she got there , one of the windows in the gallery was open , and there she saw her sister ' s head hung up on the window frame ; so she leapt her goat through the window into the gallery , snapped up the head , and set off with it .
after her came the witches to try to get the head again , and they flocked about her as thick as a swarm of bees or a nest of ants ; but the goat snorted and puffed , and butted with his horns , and tatterhood beat and banged them about with her wooden spoon ; and so the pack of witches had to give it up .
so tatterhood got back to her ship , took the calf ' s head off her sister , and put her own on again , and then she became a girl as she had been before .
after that she sailed a long , long way , to a strange king ' s realm . now the king of that land was a widower , and had an only son .
so when he saw the strange sail , he sent messengers down to the strand to find out whence it came , and who owned it ; but when the king ' s men came down there , they saw never a living soul on board but tatterhood , and there she was , riding round and round the deck on her goat at full speed , till her elf locks streamed again in the wind .
the folk from the palace were all amazed at this sight , and asked were there not more on board .
yes , there were ; she had a sister with her , said tatterhood .
her , too , they wanted to see , but tatterhood said " no ,"—" no one shall see her , unless the king comes himself ," she said ; and so she began to gallop about on her goat till the deck thundered again . so when the servants got back to the palace , and told what they had seen and heard down at the ship , the king was for setting out at once , that he might see the lassie that rode on the goat .
when he got down , tatterhood led out her sister , and she was so fair and gentle , the king fell over head and ears in love with her as he stood .
he brought them both back with him to the palace , and wanted to have the sister for his queen ; but tatterhood said " no ;" the king couldn ' t have her in any way , unless the king ' s son chose to have tatterhood .
that you may fancy the prince was very loath to do , such an ugly hussy as tatterhood was ; but at last the king and all the others in the palace talked him over , and he yielded , giving his word to take her for his queen ; but it went sore against the grain , and he was a doleful man . now they set about the wedding , both with brewing and baking ; and when all was ready , they were to go to church ; but the prince thought it the weariest churching he had ever had in all his life .
first , the king drove on with his bride , and she was so lovely and so grand , all the people stopped to look after her all along the road , and they stared at her till she was out of sight .
after them came the prince on horseback by the side of tatterhood , who trotted along on her goat with her wooden spoon in her fist , and to look at him , it was more like going to a burial than a wedding , and that his own ; so sorrowful he seemed , and with never a word to say .
" why don ' t you talk ?"
asked tatterhood , when they had ridden a bit .
" why , what should i talk about ?"
answered the prince .
" well , you might at least ask me why i ride upon this ugly goat ," said tatterhood .
" why do you ride on that ugly goat ?"
asked the prince .
" is it an ugly goat ?
why , it ' s the grandest horse bride ever rode on ," answered tatterhood ; and in a trice the goat became a horse , and that the finest the prince had ever set eyes on . then they rode on again a bit , but the prince was just as woeful as before , and couldn ' t get a word out .
so tatterhood asked him again why he didn ' t talk , and when the prince answered , he didn ' t know what to talk about , she said ,— you can at least ask me why i ride with this ugly spoon in my fist .
"" why do you ride with that ugly spoon ?"
asked the prince .
" is it an ugly spoon ?
why , it ' s the loveliest silver wand bride ever bore ," said tatterhood ; and in a trice it became a silver wand , so dazzling bright , the sunbeams glistened from it . so they rode on another bit , but the prince was just as sorrowful , and said never a word .
in a little while tatterhood asked him again why he didn ' t talk , and bade him ask why she wore that ugly gray hood on her head .
" why do you wear that ugly gray hood on your head ?"
asked the prince .
" is it an ugly hood ?
why , it ' s the brightest golden crown bride ever wore ," answered tatterhood , and it became a crown on the spot . now they rode on a long while again , and the prince was so woeful , that he sat without sound or speech , just as before .
so his bride asked him again why he didn ' t talk , and bade him ask now why her face was so ugly and ashen - gray ?" ah !"
asked the prince , " why is your face so ugly and ashen - gray ?
"" i ugly ," said the bride ; " you think my sister pretty , but i am ten times prettier ;" and lo !
when the prince looked at her , she was so lovely , he thought there never was so lovely a woman in all the world .
after that , i shouldn ' t wonder if the prince found his tongue , and no longer rode along hanging down his head . so they drank the bridal cup both deep and long , and , after that , both prince and king set out with their brides to the princess ' s father ' s palace , and there they had another bridal feast , and drank anew , both deep and long .
there was no end to the fun ; and , if you make haste and run to the king ' s palace , i dare say you ' ll find there ' s still a drop of the bridal ale left for you .
