once on a time there was a hen that had flown up , and perched on an oak - tree for the night .
when the night came , she dreamed that unless she got to the dovrefell , the world would come to an end .
so that very minute , she jumped down , and set out on her way .
when she had walked a bit she met a cock .
" good day , cocky - locky ," said the hen .
" good day , henny - penny ," said the cock ; " whither away so early ?
"" oh , i ' m going to the dovrefell , that the world mayn ' t come to an end ," said the hen .
" who told you that , henny - penny ?"
asked the cock .
" i sat in the oak and dreamt it last night ," said the hen .
" i ' ll go with you ," said the cock . well , they walked on a good bit , and then they met a duck .
" good day , ducky - lucky ," said the cock .
" good day , cocky - locky ," said the duck ; " whither away so early ?
"" oh , i ' m going to the dovrefell , that the world mayn ' t come to an end ," said the cock .
" who told you that , cocky - locky ?
"" henny - penny ," said the cock .
" who told you that , henny - penny ?"
asked the duck .
" i sat in the oak and dreamt it last night ," said the hen .
" i ' ll go with you ", said the duck . so they went off together , and after a bit they met a goose .
" good day , goosey - poosey ," said the duck .
" good day , ducky - lucky ," said the goose ; " whither away so early ?
"" i ' m going to the dovrefell , that the world mayn ' t come to an end ," said the duck .
" who told you that , ducky - lucky ?"
asked the goose ." cocky - locky .
"" who told you that , cocky - locky ?"" henny - penny .
"" how do you know that , henny - penny ?"
said the goose .
" i sat in the oak and dreamt it last night goosey - poosey ," said the hen .
" i ' ll go with you ," said the goose . now when they had all walked along for a bit , a fox met them .
" good day , foxy - cocksy ," said the goose .
" good day , goosey - poosey .
"" whither away , foxy - cocksy ?
"" whither away yourself , goosey - poosey ?
"" i ' m going to the dovrefell , that the world mayn ' t come to an end ," said the goose .
" who told you that , goosey - poosey ?"
asked the fox ." ducky - lucky .
"" who told you that , ducky - lucky ?"" cocky - locky .
"" who told you that , cocky - locky ?"" henny - penny .
"" how do you know that , henny - penny ?
"" i sat in the oak and dreamt last night , that if we don ' t get to the dovrefell , the world will come to an end ," said the hen .
" stuff and nonsense ," said the fox ; " the world won ' t come to an end if you don ' t go thither .
no ; come home with me to my earth .
that ' s far better .
for it ' s warm and jolly there .
" well , they went home with the fox to his earth , and when they got in , the fox laid on lots of fuel , so that they all got very sleepy . the duck and the goose , they settled themselves down in a corner , but the cock and hen flew up on a post .
so when the goose and duck were well asleep , the fox took the goose and laid him on the embers , and roasted him .
the hen smelt the strong roast - meat , and sprang up to a higher peg , and said , half asleep —" faugh , what a nasty smell ! what a nasty smell !
"" oh , stuff ," said the fox ; " it ' s only the smoke driven down the chimney ; go to sleep again , and hold your tongue .
" so the hen went off to sleep again . now the fox had hardly got the goose well down his throat , before he did the very same with the duck .
he took and laid him on the embers , and roasted him for a dainty bit . then the hen woke up again , and sprang up to a higher peg still .
" faugh , what a nasty smell ! what a nasty smell !
" she said again , and then she got her eyes open , and came to see how the fox had eaten both the twain , goose and duck ; so she flew up to the highest peg of all , and perched there , and peeped up through the chimney .
" nay , nay ; just see what a lovely lot of geese flying yonder ," she said to the fox . out ran reynard to fetch a fat roast .
but while he was gone , the hen woke up the cock , and told him how it had gone with goosey - poosey and ducky - lucky ; and so cocky - locky and henny - penny flew out through the chimney , and if they hadn ' t got to the dovrefell , it surely would have been all over with the world .
