once on a time there was a king who had become a widower .
by his queen he had one daughter , who was so clever and lovely , there wasn ' t a cleverer or lovelier princess in all the world .
so the king went on a long time sorrowing for the queen , whom he had loved so much , but at last he got weary of living alone , and married another queen , who was a widow , and had , too , an only daughter ; but this daughter was just as bad and ugly as the other was kind , and clever , and lovely .
the stepmother and her daughter were jealous of the princess , because she was so lovely ; but so long as the king was at home they daren ' t do her any harm , he was so fond of her . well , after a time he fell into war with another king , and went out to battle with his host , and then the stepmother thought she might do as she pleased ; and so she both starved and beat the princess , and was after her in every hole and corner of the house .
at last she thought everything too good for her , and turned her out to herd cattle .
so there she went about with the cattle , and herded them in the woods and on the fells .
as for food , she got little or none , and she grew thin and wan , and was always sobbing and sorrowful .
now in the herd there was a great dun bull , which always kept himself so neat and sleek , and often and often he came up to the princess , and let her pat him .
so one day when she sat there , sad , and sobbing , and sorrowful , he came up to her and asked her outright why she was always in such grief .
she answered nothing , but went on weeping ." ah !"
said the bull , " i know all about it quite well , though you won ' t tell me ; you weep because the queen is bad to you , and because she is ready to starve you to death .
but food you ' ve no need to fret about , for in my left ear lies a cloth , and when you take and spread it out , you may have as many dishes as you please .
" so she did that , took the cloth and spread it out on the grass , and lo !
it served up the nicest dishes one could wish to have ; there was wine too , and mead , and sweet cake .
well , she soon got up her flesh again , and grew so plump , and rosy , and white , that the queen and her scrawny chip of a daughter turned blue and yellow for spite .
the queen couldn ' t at all make out how her stepdaughter got to look so well on such bad fare , so she told one of her maids to go after her in the wood , and watch and see how it all was , for she thought some of the servants in the house must give her food .
so the maid went after her , and watched in the wood , and then she saw how the stepdaughter took the cloth out of the bull ' s ear , and spread it out , and how it served up the nicest dishes , which the stepdaughter ate and made good cheer over .
all this the maid told the queen when she went home . and now the king came home from war , and had won the fight against the other king with whom he went out to battle .
so there was great joy throughout the palace , and no one was gladder than the king ' s daughter .
but the queen shammed sick , and took to her bed , and paid the doctor a great fee to get him to say she could never be well again unless she had some of the dun bull ' s flesh to eat .
both the king ' s daughter and the folk in the palace asked the doctor if nothing else would help her , and prayed hard for the bull , for everyone was fond of him , and they all said there wasn ' t that bull ' s match in all the land .
but no ; he must and should be slaughtered , nothing else would do .
when the king ' s daughter heard that , she got very sorrowful , and went down into the byre to the bull .
there , too , he stood and hung down his head , and looked so downcast that she began to weep over him .
" what are you weeping for ?"
asked the bull . so she told him how the king had come home again , and how the queen had shammed sick and got the doctor to say she could never be well and sound again unless she got some of the dun bull ' s flesh to eat , and so now he was to be slaughtered .
" if they get me killed first ," said the bull , " they ' ll soon take your life too .
now , if you ' re of my mind , we ' ll just start off , and go away tonight .
"'' well , the princess thought it bad , you may be sure , to go and leave her father , but she thought it still worse to be in the house with the queen ; and so she gave her word to the bull to come to him . at night , when all had gone to bed , the princess stole down to the byre to the bull , and so he took her on his back , and set off from the homestead as fast as ever he could .
and when the folk got up at cockcrow next morning to slaughter the bull , why , he was gone ; and when the king got up and asked for his daughter , she was gone too .
he sent out messengers on all sides to hunt for them , and gave them out in all the parish churches ; but there was no one who had caught a glimpse of them .
meanwhile , the bull went through many lands with the king ' s daughter on his back , and so one day they came to a great copper wood , where both the trees , and branches , and leaves , and flowers , and everything , were nothing but copper . but before they went into the wood , the bull said to the king ' s daughter , " now , when we get into this wood , mind you take care not to touch even a leaf of it , else it ' s all over both with me and you , for here dwells a troll with three heads who owns this wood .
" no , bless her , she ' d be sure to take care not to touch anything .
well , she was very careful , and leant this way and that to miss the boughs , and put them gently aside with her hands ; but it was such a thick wood , ' twas scarce possible to get through ; and so , with all her pains , somehow or other she tore off a leaf , which she held in her hand ." au !
au !
what have you done now ?"
said the bull ; " there ' s nothing for it now but to fight for life or death ; but mind you keep the leaf safe .
" soon after they got to the end of the wood , and a troll with three heads came running up .
" who is this that touches my wood ?"
said the troll .
" it ' s just as much mine as yours ," said the bull ." ah !"
roared the troll , " we ' ll try a fall about that .
"" as you choose ," said the bull . so they rushed at one another , and fought ; and the bull he butted , and gored , and kicked with all his might and main ; but the troll gave him as good as he brought , and it lasted the whole day before the bull got the mastery ; and then he was so full of wounds , and so worn out , he could scarce lift a leg .
then they were forced to stay there a day to rest , and then the bull bade the king ' s daughter to take the horn of ointment which hung at the troll ' s belt , and rub him with it .
then he came to himself again , and the day after they trudged on again .
so they traveled many , many days , until , after a long , long time , they came to a silver wood , where both the trees , and branches , and leaves , and flowers , and everything , were silvern . before the bull went into the wood , he said to the king ' s daughter , " now , when we get into this wood , for heaven ' s sake mind you take good care ; you mustn ' t touch anything , and not pluck off so much as one leaf , else it is all over both with me and you ; for here is a troll with six heads who owns it , and him i don ' t think i should be able to master .
"" no ," said the king ' s daughter ; " i ' ll take good care and not touch anything you don ' t wish me to touch .
" but when they got into the wood , it was so close and thick , they could scarce get along .
she was as careful as careful could be , and leant to this side and that to miss the boughs , and put them on one side with her hands , but every minute the branches struck her across the eyes , and , in spite of all her pains , it so happened she tore off a leaf ." au !
au !
what have you done now ?"
said the bull .
" there ' s nothing for it now but to fight for life and death , for this troll has six heads , and is twice as strong as the other , but mind you keep the leaf safe , and don ' t lose it .
" just as he said that , up came the troll .
" who is this ," he said , " that touches my wood ?
"" it ' s as much mine as yours ," said the bull .
" that we ' ll try a fall about ," roared the troll .
" as you choose ," said the bull , and rushed at the troll , and gored out his eyes , and drove his horns right through his body , so that the entrails gushed out ; but the troll was almost a match for him , and it lasted three whole days before the bull got the life gored out of him .
but then he , too , was so weak and wretched , it was as much as he could do to stir a limb , and so full of wounds , that the blood streamed from him .
so he said to the king ' s daughter she must take the horn of ointment that hung at the troll ' s belt , and rub him with it .
then she did that , and he came to himself ; but they were forced to stay there a week to rest before the bull had strength enough to go on . at last they set off again , but the bull was still poorly , and they went rather slow at first .
so to spare time the king ' s daughter said as she was young and light of foot , she could very well walk , but she couldn ' t get leave to do that .
no ; she must seat herself up on his back again .
so on they traveled through many lands a long time , and the king ' s daughter did not know in the least whither they went ; but after a long , long time they came to a gold wood .
it was so grand , the gold dropped from every twig , and all the trees , and boughs , and flowers , and leaves , were of pure gold .
here , too , the same thing happened as had happened in the silver wood and copper wood .
the bull told the king ' s daughter she mustn ' t touch it for anything , for there was a troll with nine heads who owned it , and he was much bigger and stouter than both the others put together , and he didn ' t think he could get the better of him .
no ; she ' d be sure to take heed not to touch it ; that he might know very well .
but when they got into the wood , it was far thicker and closer than the silver wood , and the deeper they went into it the worse it got . the wood went on getting thicker and thicker , and closer and closer ; and at last she thought there was no way at all to get through it .
she was in such an awful fright of plucking off anything , that she sat , and twisted and turned herself this way and that , and hither and thither , to keep clear of the boughs , and she put them on one side with her hands ; but every moment the branches struck her across the eyes , so that she couldn ' t see what she was clutching at ; and lo !
before she knew how it came about , she had a gold apple in her hand .
then she was so bitterly sorry she burst into tears and wanted to throw it away ; but the bull said she must keep it safe and watch it well , and comforted her as well as he could ; but he thought it would be a hard tussle , and he doubted how it would go . just then up came the troll with the nine heads , and he was so ugly , the king ' s daughter scarcely dared to look at him .
" who is this that touches my wood ?"
he roared .
" it ' s just as much mine as yours ," said the bull .
" that we ' ll try a fall about ," roared the troll again .
" just as you choose ," said the bull ; and so they rushed at one another , and fought , and it was such a dreadful sight the king ' s daughter was ready to swoon away .
the bull gored out the troll ' s eyes , and drove his horns through and through his body , till the entrails came tumbling out ; but the troll fought bravely ; and when the bull got one head gored to death , the rest breathed life into it again , and so it lasted a whole week before the bull was able to get the life out of them all .
but then he was utterly worn out and wretched .
he couldn ' t stir a foot , and his body was all one wound .
he couldn ' t so much as ask the king ' s daughter to take the horn of ointment which hung at the troll ' s belt , and rub it over him .
but she did it all the same , and then he came to himself by little and little ; but they had to lie there and rest three weeks before he was fit to go on again . then they set off at a snail ' s pace , for the bull said they had still a little farther to go , and so they crossed over many high hills and thick woods .
so after a while they got upon the fells .
" do you see anything ?"
asked the bull .
" no , i see nothing but the sky and the wild fell ," said the king ' s daughter . so when they climbed higher up , the fell got smoother , and they could see farther off .
" do you see anything now ?"
asked the bull .
" yes , i see a little castle far , far away ," said the princess .
" that ' s not so little though ," said the bull . after a long , long time , they came to a great cairn , where there was a spur of the fell that stood sheer across the way .
" do you see anything now ?"
asked the bull .
" yes , now i see the castle close by ," said the king ' s daughter , " and now it is much , much bigger .
"" thither you ' re to go ," said the bull .
" right underneath the castle is a pigsty , where you are to dwell .
when you come thither you ' ll find a wooden cloak , all made of strips of lath ; that you must put on , and go up to the castle and say your name is katie woodencloak , and ask for a place .
but before you go , you must take your penknife and cut my head off , and then you must flay me , and roll up the hide , and lay it under the wall of rock yonder , and under the hide you must lay the copper leaf , and the silvern leaf , and the golden apple .
yonder , up against the rock , stands a stick ; and when you want anything , you ' ve only got to knock on the wall of rock with that stick .
" at first she wouldn ' t do anything of the kind ; but when the bull said it was the only thanks he would have for what he had done for her , she couldn ' t help herself .
so , however much it grieved her heart , she hacked and cut away with her knife at the big beast till she got both his head and his hide off , and then she laid the hide up under the wall of rock , and put the copper leaf , and the silvern leaf , and the golden apple inside it . so when she had done that , she went over to the pigsty , but all the while she went she sobbed and wept .
there she put on the wooden cloak , and so went up to the palace .
when she came into the kitchen she begged for a place , and told them her name was katie woodencloak .
yes , the cook said she might have a place -- she might have leave to be there in the scullery , and wash up , for the lassie who did that work before had just gone away .
" but as soon as you get weary of being here , you ' ll go your way too , i ' ll be bound .
" no ; she was sure she wouldn ' t do that . so there she was , behaving so well , and washing up so handily .
the sunday after there were to be strange guests at the palace , so katie asked if she might have leave to carry up water for the prince ' s bath ; but all the rest laughed at her , and said , " what should you do there ?
do you think the prince will care to look at you , you who are such a fright ?
" but she wouldn ' t give it up , and kept on begging and praying ; and at last she got leave .
so when she went up the stairs , her wooden cloak made such a clatter , the prince came out and asked , " pray , who are you ?
"" oh , i was just going to bring up water for your royal highness ' s bath ," said katie .
" do you think now ," said the prince , " i ' d have anything to do with the water you bring ?"
and with that he threw the water over her . so she had to put up with that , but then she asked leave to go to church ; well , she got that leave too , for the church lay close by .
but first of all she went to the rock , and knocked on its face with the stick which stood there , just as the bull had said .
and straightway out came a man , who said , " what ' s your will ?
" so the princess said she had got leave to go to church and hear the priest preach , but she had no clothes to go in .
so he brought out a kirtle , which was as bright as the copper wood , and she got a horse and saddle beside .
now , when she got to the church , she was so lovely and grand , all wondered who she could be , and scarce one of them listened to what the priest said , for they looked too much at her .
as for the prince , he fell so deep in love with her , he didn ' t take his eyes off her for a single moment . so , as she went out of church , the prince ran after her , and held the church door open for her ; and so he got hold of one of her gloves , which was caught in the door .
when she went away and mounted her horse , the prince went up to her again , and asked whence she came .
" oh , i ' m from bath ," said katie ; and while the prince took out the glove to give it to her , she said : bright before and dark behind , clouds come rolling on the wind ; that this prince may never seewhere my good steed goes with me . the prince had never seen the like of that glove , and went about far and wide asking after the land whence the proud lady , who rode off without her glove , said she came ; but there was no one who could tell where " bath " lay . next sunday some one had to go up to the prince with a towel .
" oh , may i have leave to go up with it ?"
said katie .
" what ' s the good of your going ?"
said the others ; " you saw how it fared with you last time .
" but katie wouldn ' t give in ; she kept on begging and praying , till she got leave ; and then she ran up the stairs , so that her wooden cloak made a great clatter .
out came the prince , and when he saw it was katie , he tore the towel out of her hand , and threw it into her face .
" pack yourself off , you ugly troll ," he cried ; " do you think i ' d have a towel which you have touched with your smutty fingers ?
" after that the prince set off to church , and katie begged for leave to go too .
they all asked what business she had at church -- she who had nothing to put on but that wooden cloak , which was so black and ugly .
but katie said the priest was such a brave man to preach , what he said did her so much good ; and so at last she got leave .
now she went again to the rock and knocked , and so out came the man , and gave her a kirtle far finer than the first one ; it was all covered with silver , and it shone like the silver wood ; and she got besides a noble steed , with a saddlecloth broidered with silver , and a silver bit . so when the king ' s daughter got to the church , the folk were still standing about in the churchyard .
and all wondered and wondered who she could be , and the prince was soon on the spot , and came and wished to hold her horse for her while she got off .
but she jumped down , and said there was no need , for her horse was so well broke , it stood still when she bade it , and came when she called it . so they all went into church , but there was scarce a soul that listened to what the priest said , for they looked at her a deal too much ; and the prince fell still deeper in love than the first time . when the sermon was over , and she went out of church .
and was going to mount her horse , up came the prince again and asked her whence she came .
" oh , i ' m from towelland ," said the king ' s daughter ; and as she said that , she dropped her riding whip , and when the prince stooped to pick it up , she said : bright before and dark behind , clouds come rolling on the wind ; that this prince may never see where my good steed goes with me . so away she was again ; and the prince couldn ' t tell what had become of her .
he went about far and wide , asking after the land whence she said she came , but there was no one who could tell him where it lay ; and so the prince had to make the best he could of it . next sunday someone had to go up to the prince with a comb .
katie begged for leave to go up with it , but the others put her in mind how she had fared the last time , and scolded her for wishing to go before the prince -- such a black and ugly fright as she was in her wooden cloak .
but she wouldn ' t leave off asking till they let her go up to the prince with his comb .
so , when she came clattering up the stairs again , out came the prince , and took the comb , and threw it at her , and bade her be off as fast as she could .
after that the prince went to church , and katie begged for leave to go too .
they asked again what business she had there , she who was so foul and black , and who had no clothes to show herself in .
might be the prince or some one else would see her , and then both she and all the others would smart for it ; but katie said they had something else to do than to look at her ; and she wouldn ' t leave off begging and praying till they gave her leave to go . so the same thing happened now as had happened twice before .
she went to the rock and knocked with the stick , and then the man came out and gave her a kirtle which was far grander than either of the others .
it was almost all pure gold , and studded with diamonds ; and she got besides a noble steed , with a gold broidered saddlecloth and a golden bit . now when the king ' s daughter got to the church , there stood the priest and all the people in the churchyard waiting for her .
up came the prince running , and wanted to hold her horse , but she jumped off , and said , " no ; thanks -- there ' s no need , for my horse is so well broke , it stands still when i bid him .
" so they all hastened into church , and the priest got into the pulpit , but no one listened to a word he said ; for they all looked too much at her , and wondered whence she came ; and the prince , he was far deeper in love than either of the former times .
he had no eyes , or ears , or sense for anything , but just to sit and stare at her . so when the sermon was over , and the king ' s daughter was to go out of the church , the prince had got a firkin of pitch poured out in the porch , that he might come and help her over it ; but she didn ' t care a bit -- she just put her foot right down into the midst of the pitch , and jumped across it ; but then one of her golden shoes stuck fast in it , and as she got on her horse , up came the prince running out of the church , and asked whence she came .
" i ' m from combland ," said katie .
but when the prince wanted to reach her the gold shoe , she said : bright before and dark behind , clouds come rolling on the wind ; that this prince may never see where my good steed goes with me . so the prince couldn ' t tell still what had become of her , and he went about a weary time all over the world asking for " combland ," but when no one could tell him where it lay , he ordered it to be given out everywhere that he would wed the woman whose foot could fit the gold shoe . so many came of all sorts from all sides , fair and ugly alike ; but there was no one who had so small a foot as to be able to get on the gold shoe .
and after a long , long time , who should come but katie ' s wicked stepmother , and her daughter , too , and her the gold shoe fitted ; but ugly she was , and so loathly she looked , the prince only kept his word sore against his will .
still they got ready the wedding feast , and she was dressed up and decked out as a bride ; but as they rode to church , a little bird sat upon a tree and sang : a bit off her heel , and a bit off her toe ; katie woodencloak ' s tiny shoeis full of blood -- that ' s all i know . and , sure enough , when they looked to it , the bird told the truth , for blood gushed out of the shoe . then all the maids and women who were about the palace had to go up to try on the shoe , but there was none of them whom it would fit at all .
" but where ' s katie woodencloak ?"
asked the prince , when all the rest had tried the shoe , for he understood the song of birds very well , and bore in mind what the little bird had said .
" oh , she !
think of that !"
said the rest ; it ' s no good her coming forward .
" why , she ' s legs like a horse .
"" very true , i daresay ," said the prince ; " but since all the others have tried , katie may as well try too ."" katie !"
he bawled out through the door ; and katie came trampling upstairs , and her wooden cloak clattered as if a whole regiment of dragoons were charging up .
" now , you must try the shoe on , and be a princess , you too ," said the other maids , and laughed and made game of her . so katie took up the shoe , and put her foot into it like nothing , and threw off her wooden cloak ; and so there she stood in her gold kirtle , and it shone so that the sunbeams glistened from her ; and , lo !
on her other foot she had the fellow to the gold shoe . so when the prince knew her again , he grew so glad , he ran up to her and threw his arms round her , and gave her a kiss ; and when he heard she was a king ' s daughter , he got gladder still , and then came the wedding - feast ; and sosnip , snip , snover , this story ' s over .
