once on a time there was a woman who had an only son , and he was no taller than your thumb ; and so they called him thumbikin . now , when he had come to be old enough to know right and wrong , his mother told him to go out and woo him a bride , for now she said it was high time he thought about getting a wife .
when thumbikin heard that , he was very glad ; so they got their driving gear in order and set off , and his mother put him into her bosom .
now they were going to a palace where there was such an awfully big princess , but when they had gone a bit of the way , thumbikin was lost and gone .
his mother hunted for him everywhere , and bawled to him , and wept because he was lost , and she couldn ' t find him again .
" pip , pip ," said thumbikin , " here i am ," and he had hidden himself in the horse ' s mane . so he came out , and had to give his word to his mother that he wouldn ' t do so any more .
but when they had driven a bit farther on , thumbikin was lost again .
his mother hunted for him , and called him and wept ; but gone he was , and gone he stayed .
" pip , pip ," said thumbikin at last ; and then she heard how he laughed and tittered , but she couldn ' t find him at all for the life of her .
" pip , pip , why , here i am now !"
said thumbikin , and came out of the horse ' s ear . so he had to give his word that he wouldn ' t hide himself again ; but they had scarce driven a bit farther before he was gone again .
he couldn ' t help it .
as for his mother , she hunted , and wept , and called him by name ; but gone he was , and gone he stayed ; and the more she hunted , the less she could find him in any way .
" pip , pip , here i am then ," said thumbikin . but she couldn ' t make out at all where he was , his voice sounded so dull and muffled . so she hunted , and he kept on saying , " pip , here i am ," and laughed and chuckled , that she couldn ' t find him ; but all at once the horse snorted , and it snorted thumbikin out , for he had crept up one of his nostrils . then his mother took him and put him into a bag ; she knew no other way , for she saw well enough he couldn ' t help hiding himself . so when they came to the palace the match was soon made , for the princess thought him a pretty little chap , and it wasn ' t long before the wedding came on too . now , when they were going to sit down to the wedding - feast , thumbikin sat at the table by the princess ' s side ; but he had worse than no seat , for when he was to eat he couldn ' t reach up to the table ; and so , if the princess hadn ' t helped him up on to it , he wouldn ' t have got a bit to eat . now it went good and well so long as he had to eat off a plate , but then there came a great bowl of porridge — that he couldn ' t reach up to ; but thumbikin soon found out a way to help himself ; he climbed up and sat on the lip of the bowl .
but then there was a pat of melting butter right in the middle of the bowl , and that he couldn ' t reach to dip his porridge into it , and so he went on and took his seat at the edge of the melting butter ; but just then who should come but the princess , with a great spoonful of porridge to dip it into the butter ; and , alas !
she went too near to thumbikin , and tipped him over ; and so he fell over head and ears , and was drowned in the melted butter .
