once on a time there was a king who had twelve sons .
when they were grown big he told them they must go out into the world and win themselves wives , but these wives must each be able to spin , and weave , and sew a shirt in one day , else he wouldn ' t have them for daughters - in - law . to each he gave a horse and a new suit of mail , and they went out into the world to look after their brides ; but when they had gone a bit of the way , they said they wouldn ' t have boots , their youngest brother , with them — he wasn ' t fit for anything . well , boots had to stay behind , and he didn ' t know what to do or whither to turn ; and so he grew so downcast , he got off his horse , and sat down in the tall grass to weep .
but when he had sat a little while , one of the tufts in the grass began to stir and move , and out of it came a little white thing , and when it came nearer , boots saw it was a charming , little lassie , only such a tiny bit of a thing .
so the lassie went up to him , and asked if he would come down below and see " doll i ' the grass .
" yes , he ' d be very happy ; and so he went . now , when he got down , there sat doll i ' the grass on a chair ; she was so lovely and so smart , and she asked boots whither he was going , and what was his business . so he told her how there were twelve brothers of them , and how the king had given them horse and mail , and said they must each go out into the world and find them a wife who could spin , and weave , and sew a shirt in a day .
" but if you ' ll only say at once you ' ll be my wife , i ' ll not go a step farther ," said boots to doll i ' the grass . well , she was willing enough , and so she made haste , and span , and wove , and sewed the shirt , but it was so tiny , tiny little .
it wasn ' t longer than so ———— long . so boots set off home with it , but when he brought it out he was almost ashamed , it was so small .
still the king said he should have her , and so boots set off , glad and happy to fetch his little sweetheart .
so when he got to doll i ' the grass , he wished to take her up before him on his horse ; but she wouldn ' t have that , for she said she would sit and drive along in a silver spoon , and that she had two small white horses to draw her .
so off they set , he on his horse and she on her silver spoon , and the two horses that drew her were two tiny white mice ; but boots always kept the other side of the road , he was so afraid lest he should ride over her , she was so little .
so , when they had gone a bit of the way , they came to a great piece of water .
here boots ' horse got frightened , and shied across the road and upset the spoon , and doll i ' the grass tumbled into the water .
then boots got so sorrowful , because he didn ' t know how to get her out again ; but in a little while up came a merman with her , and now she was as well and full grown as other men and women , and far lovelier than she had been before .
so he took her up before him on his horse , and rode home . when boots got home all his brothers had come , back each with his sweetheart , but these were all so ugly , and foul , and wicked , that they had done nothing but fight with one another on the way home , and on their heads they had a kind of hat that was daubed over with tar and soot , and so the rain had run down off the hats on to their faces , till they got far uglier and nastier than they had been before .
when his brothers saw boots and his sweetheart , they were all as jealous as jealous could be of her ; but the king was so overjoyed with them both , that he drove all the others away , and so boots held his wedding - feast with doll i ' the grass , and after that they lived well and happily together a long long time , and if they ' re not dead , why , they ' re alive still .
