once on a time the cock and the hen went out into the hazel - wood to pick nuts ; and so the hen got a nutshell in her throat , and lay on her back , flapping her wings . off went the cock to fetch water for her ; so he came to the spring and said ,—" dear good friend spring , give me a drop of water , that i may give it to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
" but the spring answered ,—" you ' ll get no water from me until i get leaves from you .
" so the cock ran to the linden and said ,—" dear good friend linden , give me some of your leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , and the spring ' ll give me water to give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no leaves from me ," said the linden , " until i get a red ribbon with a golden edge from you .
" so the cock ran to the virgin mary .
" dear good virgin mary , give me a red ribbon with a golden edge , and i ' ll give the red ribbon to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , and the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no red ribbon from me ," answered the virgin mary , " until i get shoes from you .
" so the cock ran to the shoemaker and said ,—" dear good friend shoemaker , give me shoes , and i ' ll give the shoes to the virgin mary , the virgin mary ' ll give me a red ribbon , the red ribbon i ' ll give to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no shoes from me ," said the shoemaker , " until i get bristles from you .
" so the cock ran to the sow and said ,— " dear good friend sow , give me bristles , the bristles i ' ll give to the shoemaker , the shoemaker ' ll give me shoes , the shoes i ' ll give to the virgin mary , the virgin mary ' ll give me a red ribbon , the red ribbon i ' ll give to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no bristles from me ," said the sow , " until i get corn from you .
" so the cock ran to the thresher and said ,—" dear good friend thresher , give me corn , the corn i ' ll give to the sow , the sow ' ll give me bristles , the bristles i ' ll give to the shoemaker , the shoemaker ' ll give me shoes , the shoes i ' ll give to the virgin mary , the virgin mary ' ll give me a red ribbon , the red ribbon i ' ll give to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no corn from me ," said the thresher , " until i get a bannock from you .
" so the cock ran to the baker ' s wife and said ,—" dear good friend mrs . baker , give me a bannock , the bannock i ' ll give to the thresher , the thresher ' ll give me corn , the corn i ' ll give to the sow , the sow ' ll give me bristles , the bristles i ' ll give to the shoemaker , the shoemaker ' ll give me shoes , the shoes i ' ll give to the virgin mary , the virgin mary ' ll give me a red ribbon , the red ribbon i ' ll give to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no bannock from me ," said the baker ' s wife , " until i get wood from you .
" so the cock ran to the woodcutter and said ,—" dear good friend woodcutter , give me wood , the wood i ' ll give to the baker ' s wife , the baker ' s wife ' ll give me a bannock , the bannock i ' ll give to the thresher , the thresher ' ll give me corn , the corn i ' ll give to the sow , the sow ' ll give me bristles , the bristles i ' ll give to the shoemaker , the shoemaker ' ll give me shoes , the shoes i ' ll give to the virgin mary , the virgin mary ' ll give me a red ribbon , the red ribbon i ' ll give to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no wood from me ," answered the woodcutter , " until i get an axe from you .
" so the cock ran to the smith and said ,—" dear good friend smith , give me an axe , the axe i ' ll give to the woodcutter , the woodcutter ' ll give me wood , the wood i ' ll give to the baker ' s wife , the baker ' s wife ' ll give me a bannock , the bannock i ' ll give to the thresher , the thresher ' ll give me corn , the corn i ' ll give to the sow , the sow ' ll give me bristles , the bristles i ' ll give to the shoemaker , the shoemaker ' ll give me shoes , the shoes i ' ll give to the virgin mary , the virgin mary ' ll give me a red ribbon , the red ribbon i ' ll give to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
"" you ' ll get no axe from me ," answered the smith , " until i get charcoal from you .
" so the cock ran to the charcoal - burner and said ,—" dear good friend charcoal - burner , give me charcoal , the charcoal i ' ll give to the smith , the smith ' ll give me an axe , the axe i ' ll give to the woodcutter , the woodcutter ' ll give me wood , the wood i ' ll give to the baker ' s wife , the baker ' s wife ' ll give me a bannock , the bannock i ' ll give to the thresher , the thresher ' ll give me corn , the corn i ' ll give to the sow , the sow ' ll give me bristles , the bristles i ' ll give to the shoemaker , the shoemaker ' ll give me shoes , the shoes i ' ll give to the virgin mary , the virgin mary ' ll give me a red ribbon , the red ribbon i ' ll give to the linden , the linden ' ll give me leaves , the leaves i ' ll give to the spring , the spring ' ll give me water , the water i ' ll give to dame partlet my mate , who lies at death ' s door in the hazel - wood .
" so the charcoal - burner took pity on the cock , and gave him a bit of charcoal , and then the smith got his coal , and the woodcutter his axe , and the baker ' s wife her wood , and the thresher his bannock , and the sow her corn , and the shoemaker his bristles , and the virgin mary her shoes , and the linden its red ribbon with a golden edge , and the spring its leaves , and the cock his drop of water , and he gave it to dame partlet , his mate , who lay there at death ' s door in the hazel - wood , and so she got all right again .
