once on a time there was a king who had twelve daughters , and he was so fond of them they must always be at his side ; but every day at noon , while the king slept , the princesses went out to take a walk .
so once , while the king was taking his noontide nap , and the princesses had gone to take their walk , all at once they were missing , and worse , they never came home again .
then there was great grief and sorrow all over the land , but the most sorry of all was the king .
he sent messengers out throughout his own and other realms , and gave out their names in all the churches , and had the bells tolled for them in all the steeples ; but gone the princesses were , and gone they stayed , and none could tell what was become of them .
so it was as clear as day that they must have been carried off by some witchcraft . well , it wasn ' t long before these tidings spread far and wide , over land and town , ay , over many lands ; and so the news came to a king ever so many lands off , who had twelve sons .
so when these princes heard of the twelve king ' s daughters , they asked leave of their father to go out and seek them .
they had hard work to get his leave , for he was afraid lest he should never see them again , but they all fell down on their knees before the king , and begged so long , at last he was forced to let them go after all . he fitted out a ship for them , and gave them ritter red , who was quite at home at sea , for a captain .
so they sailed about a long , long time , landed on every shore they came to , and hunted and asked after the princesses , but they could neither hear nor see anything of them .
and now , a few days only were wanting to make up seven years since they set sail , when one day a strong storm rose , and such foul weather , they thought they should never come to land again , and all had to work so hard , they couldn ' t get a wink of sleep so long as the storm lasted .
but when the third day was nearly over , the wind fell , and all at once it got as still as still could be .
now , they were all so weary with work and the rough weather , they fell fast asleep in the twinkling of an eye ; all but the youngest prince , he could get no rest , and couldn ' t go off to sleep at all . so as he was pacing up and down the deck , the ship came to a little island , and on the island ran a little dog , and bayed and barked at the ship as if it wanted to come on board .
so the prince went to that side of the deck , and tried to coax the dog , and whistled and whistled to him , but the more he whistled and coaxed , the more the dog barked and snarled .
well , he thought it a shame the dog should run about there and starve , for he made up his mind that it must have come thither from a ship that had been cast away in the storm ; but still he thought he should never be able to help it after all , for he couldn ' t put out the boat by himself , and as for the others , they all slept so sound , he wouldn ' t wake them for the sake of a dog .
but then the weather was so calm and still ; and at last he said to himself ; " come what may , you must go on shore and save that dog ," and so he began to try to launch the boat , and he found it far easier work than he thought .
so he rowed ashore , and went up to the dog ; but every time he tried to catch it , it jumped on one side , and so it went on till he found himself inside a great grand castle , before he knew where he was .
then the dog , all at once , was changed into a lovely princess ; and there , on the bench , sat a man so big and ugly , the prince almost lost his wits for fear .
" you ' ve no need to be afraid ," said the man — but the prince , to tell you the truth , got far more afraid when he heard his gruff voice —" for i know well enough what you want .
there are twelve princes of you , and you are looking for the twelve princesses that are lost .
i know , too , very well whereabouts they are ; they ' re with my lord and master , and there they sit , each of them on her chair , and comb his hair ; for he has twelve heads .
and now you have sailed seven years , but you ' ll have to sail seven years more before you find them .
as for you , you might stay here and welcome , and have my daughter ; but you must first slay him , for he ' s a hard master to all of us , and we ' re all weary of him , and when he ' s dead i shall be king in his stead ; but first try if you can brandish this sword .
" then the king ' s son took hold of a rusty old sword which hung on the wall , but he could scarce stir it .
" now you must take a pull at this flask ," said the troll ; and when he had done that he could stir it , and when he had taken another he could lift it , and when he had taken a third he could brandish the sword as easily as if it had been his own .
" now , when you get on board ," said the troll prince , " you must hide the sword well in your berth , that ritter red mayn ' t set eyes on it ; he ' s not man enough to wield it , but he ' ll get spiteful against you , and try to take your life .
and when seven years are almost out all but three days ," he went on to say , " everything will happen just as now ; foul weather will come on you , with a great storm , and when it is over you ' ll all be sleepy .
then you must take the sword and row ashore , and so you ' ll come to a castle where all sorts of guards will stand — wolves , and bears , and lions ; but you needn ' t be afraid of them , for they ' ll all come and crouch at your feet .
but when you come inside the castle , you ' ll soon see the troll ; he sits in a splendid chamber in grand attire and array ; twelve heads he has of his own , and the princesses sit round them , each on her chair , and comb his heads , and that ' s a work you may guess they don ' t much like .
then you must make haste , and hew off one head after the other as quick as you can ; for if he wakes and sets his eyes on you , he ' ll swallow you alive .
" so the king ' s son went on board with the sword , and he bore in mind what he had come to know .
the others still lay fast asleep and snored , and he hid the sword in his berth , so that neither ritter red nor any of the rest got sight of it .
and now it began to blow again , so he woke up the others , and said he thought they oughtn ' t to sleep any longer now when there was such a good wind .
and there was none of them that marked he had been away .
well , after the seven years were all gone but three days , all happened as the troll had said .
a great storm and foul weather came on that lasted three days , and when it had blown itself out , all the rest grew sleepy and went to rest ; but the youngest king ' s son rowed ashore , and the guards fell at his feet , and so he came to the castle .
so when he got inside the chamber , there sat the king fast asleep as the troll prince had said , and the twelve princesses sat each on her chair and combed one of his heads .
the king ' s son beckoned to the princesses to get out of the way ; they pointed to the troll , and beckoned to him again to go his way as quick as ever he could , but he kept on making signs to them to get out of the way , and then they understood that he wanted to set them free , and stole away softly one after the other , and as fast as they went , he hewed off the troll king ' s heads , till at last the blood gushed out like a great brook .
when the troll was slain he rowed on board and hid his sword .
he thought now he had done enough , and as he couldn ' t get rid of the body by himself , he thought it only fair they should help him a little .
so he woke them all up , and said it was a shame they should be snoring there , when he had found the princesses , and set them free from the troll .
the others only laughed at him , and said he had been just as sound asleep as they , and only dreamt that he was man enough to do what he said ; for if any one was to set the princesses free , it was far more likely it would be one of them .
but the youngest king ' s son told them all about it , and when they followed him to the land and saw first of all the brook of blood , and then the castle , and the troll , and the twelve heads , and the princesses , they saw plain enough that he had spoken the truth , and now the whole helped him to throw the body and the heads into the sea .
so all were glad and happy , but none more so than the princesses , who got rid of having to sit there and comb the troll ' s hair all day .
of all the silver and gold and precious things that were there , they took as much as the ship could hold , and so they went on board altogether , princes and princesses alike . but when they had gone a bit out on the sea , the princesses said they had forgotten in their joy their gold crowns , they lay behind in a press , and they would be so glad to have them .
so when none of the others was willing to fetch them , the youngest king ' s son said ,—" i have already dared so much , i can very well go back for the gold crowns too , if you will only strike sail and wait till i come again .
" yes , that they would do .
but when he had gone back so far that they couldn ' t see him any longer , ritter red , who would have been glad enough to have been their chief , and to have the youngest princess , said , " it was no use their lying there still waiting for him , for they might know very well he would never come back ; they all knew , too , how the king had given him all power and authority to sail or not as he chose ; and now they must all say ' twas he that had saved the princesses , and if any one said anything else , he should lose his life .
" the princes didn ' t dare to do anything else than what ritter red willed , and so they sailed away . meanwhile the youngest king ' s son rowed to land , went up to the castle , found the press with the gold crowns in it , and at last lugged it down to the boat , and shoved off ; but when he came where he ought to have seen the ship , lo !
it was gone .
well , as he couldn ' t catch a glimpse of it anywhere , he could very soon tell how matters stood .
to row after them was no good , and so he was forced to turn about and row back to land .
he was rather afraid to stay alone in the castle all night , but there was no other house to be got , so he plucked up a heart , locked up all the doors and gates fast , and lay down in a room where there was a bed ready made .
but fearful and woeful he was , and still more afraid he got when he had lain a while and something began to creak and groan and quake in wall and roof , as if the whole castle were being torn asunder .
then all at once down something plunged close by the side of his bed , as if it were a whole cartload of hay .
then all was still again ; but after a while he heard a voice , which bade him not to be afraid , and said ,—" here am i , the big bird dancome to help you all i can .
"" but the first thing you must do when you wake in the morning , will be to go to the barn and fetch four barrels of rye for me .
i must fill my crop with them for breakfast , else i can ' t do anything .
" when he woke up , sure enough there he saw an awfully big bird , which had a feather at the nape of his neck , as thick and long as a half - grown spruce fir .
so the king ' s son went down to the barn to fetch four barrels of rye for the big bird dan , and when he had crammed them into his crop he told the king ' s son to hang the press with the gold crowns on one side of his neck , and as much gold and silver as would weigh it down on the other side , and after that to get on his back and hold fast by the feather in the nape of his neck .
so away they went till the wind whistled after them , and so it wasn ' t long before they outstripped the ship .
the king ' s son wanted to go on board for his sword , for he was afraid lest any one should get sight of it , for the troll had told him that mustn ' t be ; but bird dan said that mustn ' t be either .
" ritter red will never see it , never fear ; but if you go on board , he ' ll try to take your life , for he has set his heart on having the youngest princess ; but make your mind quite easy about her , for she lays a naked sword by her side in bed every night .
" so after a long , long time , they came to the island where the troll prince was ; and there the king ' s son was welcomed so heartily there was no end to it .
the troll prince didn ' t know how to be good enough to him for having slain his lord and master , and so made him king of the trolls , and if the king ' s son had been willing he might easily have got the troll king ' s daughter , and half the kingdom .
but he had so set his heart on the youngest of the twelve princesses , he could take no rest , but was all for going after their ship time after time .
so the troll king begged him to be quiet a little longer , and said they had still nearly seven years to sail before they got home .
as for the princess the troll said the same thing as the big bird dan .
" you needn ' t fret yourself about her , for she lays a naked sword by her side every night in bed .
and now if you don ' t believe what i say ," said the troll , " you can go on board when they sail by here , and see for yourself , and fetch the sword too , for i may just as well have it again .
" so when they sailed by another great storm arose , and when the king ' s son went on board they all slept , and each princess lay beside her prince ; but the youngest lay alone with a naked sword beside her in the bed , and on the floor by the bedside lay ritter red .
then the king ' s son took the sword and rowed ashore again , and none of them had seen that he had been on board .
but still the king ' s son couldn ' t rest , and he often and often wanted to be off , and so at last when it got near the end of the seven years , and only three weeks were left , the troll king said ,—" now you may get ready to go , since you won ' t stay with us ; and you shall have the loan of my iron boat , which sails of itself , if you only say ," ' boat , boat , go on !
' in that boat there is an iron club , and that club you must lift a little when you see the ship straight a - head of you , and then they ' ll get such a rattling fair breeze , they ' ll forget to look at you ; but when you get alongside them , you must lift the club a little again , and then they ' ll get such a foul wind and storm they ' ll have something else to do than to stare at you ; and when you have run past them you must lift the club a third time , but you must always be sure and lay it down carefully again , else there ' ll be such a storm , both you and they will be wrecked and lost .
now when you have got to land , you have no need to bother yourself at all about the boat ; just turn it about , and shove it off , and say ," ' boat , boat , go back home !'
" when he set out they gave him so much gold and silver , and so many other costly things , and clothes and linen which the troll princess had sewn and woven for him all that long time , that he was far richer than any of his brothers . well , he had no sooner seated himself in the boat and said ,—" boat , boat , go on !
" than away went the boat , and when he saw the ship right a - head , he lifted up the club , and then they got such a fair breeze , they forgot to look at him .
when he was alongside the ship , he lifted the club again , and then such a storm arose and such foul weather , that the white foam flew about the ship , and the billows rolled over the deck , and they had something else to do than to stare at him ; and when he had run past them he lifted the club the third time , and then the storm and the wind rose so , they had still less time to look after him , and to make him out .
so he came to land long , long before the ship ; and when he had got all his goods out of the boat , he shoved it off again , and turned it about and said ," boat , boat , go back home !
" and off went the boat . then he dressed himself up as a sailor — whether the troll king had told him that or it was his own device , i ' m sure i can ' t say — and went up to a wretched hut where an old wife lived , whom he got to believe that he was a poor sailor who had been on board a great ship that was wrecked , and that he was the only soul that had got ashore .
after that he begged for house - room for himself and the goods he had saved .
" heaven mend me !"
said the old wife , " how can i lend any one house - room !
look at me and mine , why , i ' ve no bed to sleep on myself , still less one for any one else to lie on .
" well , well , it was all the same , said the sailor ; if he only got a roof over his head it didn ' t matter where he lay .
so she couldn ' t turn him out of the house , when he was so thankful for what there was .
that afternoon he fetched up his things , and the old wife , who was very eager to hear a bit of news to run about and tell , began at once to ask who he was , whence he came , whither he was bound , what it was he had with him , what his business was , and if he hadn ' t heard anything of the twelve princesses who had been away the lord knew how many years .
all this she asked and much more , which it would be waste of time to tell .
but he said he was so poorly and had such a bad headache after the awful weather he had been out in , that he couldn ' t answer any of her questions ; she must just leave him alone and let him rest a few days till he came to himself after the hard work he ' d had in the gale , and then she ' d know all she wanted . the very next day the old wife began to stir him up and ask again , but the sailor ' s head was still so bad he hadn ' t got his wits together , but somehow he let drop a word or two to show that he did know something about the princesses .
off ran the old wife with what she had heard to all the gossips and chatterboxes round about , and soon the one came running after the other to ask about the princesses , " if he had seen them ," " if they would soon be there ," " if they were on the way ," and much more of the same sort .
he still went on groaning over his headache after the storm , so that he couldn ' t tell them all about it , but so much he told them , unless they had been lost in the great storm they ' d make the land in about a fortnight or before perhaps ; but he couldn ' t say for sure whether they were alive or no , for though he had seen them , it might very well be that they had been cast away in the storm since .
so what did one of these old gossips do but run up to the palace with this story , and say that there was a sailor down in such and such an old wife ' s hut , who had seen the princesses , and that they were coming home in a fortnight or in a week ' s time .
when the king heard that he sent a messenger down to the sailor to come up to him and tell the news himself .
" i don ' t see how it ' s to be ," said the sailor , " for i haven ' t any clothes fit to stand in before the king .
" but the king said he must come ; for the king must and would talk with him , whether he were richly or poorly clad , for there was no one else who could bring him any tidings of the princesses .
so he went up at last to the palace and went in before the king , who asked him if it were true that he had seen anything of the princesses .
" ay , ay ," said the sailor , " i ' ve seen them sure enough , but i don ' t know whether they ' re still alive , for when i last caught sight of them , the weather was so foul we in our ship were cast away ; but if they ' re still alive they ' ll come safe home in a fortnight or perhaps before .
" when the king heard that he was almost beside himself for joy ; and when the time came that the sailor had said they would come , the king drove down to the strand to meet them in great state ; and there was joy and gladness over the whole land when the ship came sailing in with the princes and princesses and ritter red .
but no one was gladder than the old king , who had got his daughters back again .
the eleven eldest princesses too , were glad and merry , but the youngest , who was to have ritter red , who said that he had set them all free and slain the troll , she wept and was always sorrowful .
the king took this ill , and asked why she wasn ' t cheerful and merry like the others ; she hadn ' t anything to be sorry for now when she had got out of the troll ' s clutches , and was to have such a husband as ritter red .
but she daredn ' t say anything , for ritter red had said he would take the life of any one who told the truth how things had gone . but now one day , when they were hard at work sewing and stitching the bridal array , in came a man in a great sailor ' s cloak with a pedlar ' s pack on his back , and asked if the princesses wouldn ' t buy something fine of him for the wedding ; he had so many wares and costly things , both gold and silver .
yes , they might do so perhaps , so they looked at his wares , and they looked at him , for they thought they had seen both him and many of his costly things before .
" he who has so many fine things ," said the youngest princess , " must surely have something still more precious , and which suits us better even than these .
"" maybe i have ," said the pedlar . but now all the others cried " hush ," and bade her bear in mind what ritter red had said he would do . well , some time after the princesses sat and looked out of the window , and then the king ' s son came again with the great sea - cloak thrown about him , and the press with the gold crowns at his back ; and when he got into the palace hall he unlocked the press before the princesses , and when each of them knew her own gold crown again , the youngest said ,—" i think it only right that he who set us free should get the meed that is his due ; and he is not ritter red , but this man who has brought us our gold crowns .
he it is that set us free .
" then the king ' s son cast off the sailor ' s cloak , and stood there far finer and grander than all the rest ; and so the old king made them put ritter red to death .
and now there was real right down joy in the palace ; each took his own bride , and there just was a wedding !
why , it was heard of and talked about over twelve kings ' realms .
