once on a time there was a poor couple who had a son whose name was halvor .
ever since he was a little boy he would turn his hand to nothing , but just sat there and groped about in the ashes .
his father and mother often put him out to learn this trade or that , but halvor could stay nowhere ; for , when he had been there a day or two , he ran away from his master , and never stopped till he was sitting again in the ingle , poking about in the cinders . well , one day a skipper came and asked halvor if he hadn ' t a mind to be with him , and go to sea , and see strange lands .
yes , halvor would like that very much ; so he wasn ' t long in getting himself ready . how long they sailed i ' m sure i can ' t tell ; but the end of it was , they fell into a great storm , and when it was blown over , and it got still again , they couldn ' t tell where they were ; for they had been driven away to a strange coast , which none of them knew anything about . well , as there was just no wind at all , they stayed lying wind - bound there , and halvor asked the skipper ' s leave to go on shore and look about him ; he would sooner go , he said , than lie there and sleep .
" do you think now you ' re fit to show yourself before folk ," said the skipper , " why , you ' ve no clothes than those rags you stand in ?
" but halvor stuck to his own , and so at last he got leave but he was to be sure and come back as soon as ever it began to blow .
so off he went and found a lovely land ; wherever he came there were fine large flat corn - fields and rich meads , but , he couldn ' t catch a glimpse of a living soul .
well , it began to blow , but halvor thought he hadn ' t seen enough yet , and he wanted to walk a little farther , just to see if he couldn ' t meet any folk .
so after a while he came to a broad high road , so smooth and even , you might easily roll an egg along it .
halvor followed this , and when evening drew on he saw a great castle ever so far off , from which the sunbeams shone .
so as he had now walked the whole day and hadn ' t taken a bit to eat with him , he was as hungry as a hunter , but still the nearer he came to the castle , the more afraid he got . in the castle kitchen a great fire was blazing , and halvor went into it , but such a kitchen he had never seen in all his born days .
it was so grand and fine ; there were vessels of silver and vessels of gold , but still never a living - soul .
so when halvor had stood there a while and no one came out , he went and opened a door , and there inside sat a princess who span upon a spinning - wheel .
" nay , nay , now !"
she called out , " dare christian folk come hither ?
but now you ' d best be off about your business , if you don ' t want the troll to gobble you up ; for here lives a troll with three heads .
"" all one to me ," said the lad , " i ' d be just as glad to hear he had four heads beside ; i ' d like to see what kind of fellow he is .
as for going , i won ' t go at all .
i ' ve done no harm ; but meat you must get me , for i ' m almost starved to death .
" when halvor had eaten his fill , the princess told him to try if he could brandish the sword that hung against the wall ; no , he couldn ' t brandish it , he couldn ' t even lift it up ." oh !"
said the princess , " now you must go and take a pull of that flask that hangs by its side ; that ' s what the troll does every time he goes out to use the sword .
" so halvor took a pull , and in the twinkling of an eye he could brandish the sword like nothing ; and now he thought it high time the troll came ; and lo !
just then up came the troll puffing and blowing .
halvor jumped behind the door .
" hutetu ," said the troll , as he put his head in at the door , " what a smell of christian man ' s blood !
"" ay ," said halvor , " you ' ll soon know that to your cost ," and with that be hewed off all his heads . now the princess was so glad that she was free , she both danced and sang , but then all at once she called her sisters to mind , and so she said ,—" would my sisters were free too !
"" where are they ?"
asked halvor . well , she told him all about it ; one was taken away by a troll to his castle , which lay fifty miles off , and the other by another troll to his castle , which was fifty miles farther still .
" but now ," she said , " you must first help me to get this ugly carcase out of the house .
" yes , halvor was so strong he swept everything away , and made it all clean and tidy in no time .
so they had a good and happy time of it , and next morning he set off at peep of gray dawn ; he could take no rest by the way , but ran and walked the whole day .
when he first saw the castle he got a little afraid ; it was far grander than the first , but here too there wasn ' t a living soul to be seen .
so halvor went into the kitchen , and didn ' t stop there either , but went straight farther on into the house .
" nay , nay ," called out the princess , " dare christian folk come hither ?
i don ' t know i ' m sure how long it is since i came here , but in all that time i haven ' t seen a christian man .
' twere best you saw how to get away as fast as you came ; for here lives a troll who has six heads .
"" i shan ' t go ," said halvor , " if he had six heads besides .
"" he ' ll take you up and swallow you down alive ," said the princess . but it was no good , halvor wouldn ' t go ; he wasn ' t at all afraid of the troll , but meat and drink he must have , for he was half starved after his long journey .
well , he got as much of that as he wished , but then the princess wanted him to be off again .
" no ," said halvor , " i won ' t go , i ' ve done no harm , and i ' ve nothing to be afraid about .
"" he won ' t stay to ask that ," said the princess , " for he ' ll take you without law or leave ; but as you won ' t go , just try if you can brandish that sword yonder , which the troll wields in war .
" he couldn ' t brandish it , and then the princess said he must take a pull at the flask which hung by its side , and when he had done that he could brandish it . just then back came the troll , and he was both stout and big , so that he had to go sideways to get through the door .
when the troll got his first head in he called out ,—" hutetu , what a smell of christian man ' s blood !
" but that very moment halvor hewed off his first head , and so on all the rest as they popped in .
the princess was overjoyed , but just then she came to think of her sisters , and wished out loud they were free .
halvor thought that might easily be done , and wanted to be off at once , but first he had to help the princess to get the troll ' s carcase out of the way , and so he could only set out next morning . it was a long way to the castle , and he had to walk fast and run hard to reach it in time ; but about nightfall he saw the castle , which was far finer and grander than either of the others .
this time he wasn ' t the least afraid , but walked straight through the kitchen , and into the castle .
there sat a princess who was so pretty , there was no end to her loveliness .
she , too , like the others , told him there hadn ' t been christian folk there ever since she came thither , and bade him go away again , else the troll would swallow him alive , and do you know , she said , he has nine heads .
" ay , ay ," said halvor , " if he had nine other heads , and nine other heads still , i won ' t go away ," and so he stood fast before the stove .
the princess kept on begging him so prettily to go away , lest the troll should gobble him up , but halvor said ,—" let him come as soon as he likes .
" so she gave him the troll ' s sword , and bade him take a pull at the flask , that he might be able to brandish and wield it . just then back came the troll puffing and blowing and tearing along .
he was far stouter and bigger than the other two , and he too had to go on one side to get through the door .
so when he got his first head in , he said as the others had said ,—" hutetu , what a smell of christian man ' s blood !
" that very moment halvor hewed off the first head and then all the rest ; but the last was the toughest of them all , and it was the hardest bit of work halvor had to do to get it hewn off , although he knew very well he had strength enough to do it . so all the princesses came together to that castle , which was called soria moria castle , and they were glad and happy as they had never been in all their lives before , and they all were fond of halvor and halvor of them , and he might choose the one he liked best for his bride ; but the youngest was fondest of him of all the three . but there , after a while , halvor went about , and was so strange and dull and silent .
then the princesses asked him what he lacked , and if he didn ' t like to live with them any longer ?
yes , he did , for they had enough and to spare , and he was well off in every way , but still somehow or other he did so long to go home , for his father and mother were alive , and them he had such a great wish to see . well , they thought that might be done easily enough .
" you shall go thither and come back hither , safe and unscathed , if you will only follow our advice ," said the princesses . yes , he ' d be sure to mind all they said .
so they dressed him up till he was as grand as a king ' s son , and then they set a ring on his finger , and that was such a ring , he could wish himself thither and hither with it ; but they told him to be sure not to take it off , and not to name their names , for there would be an end of all his bravery , and then he ' d never see them more .
" if i only stood at home i ' d be glad ," said halvor ; and it was done as he had wished .
then stood halvor at his father ' s cottage door before he knew a word about it .
now it was about dusk at even , and so , when they saw such a grand stately lord walk in , the old couple got so afraid they began to bow and scrape .
then halvor asked if he couldn ' t stay there , and have a lodging there that night ; no ; that he couldn ' t .
" we can ' t do it at all ," they said , " for we haven ' t this thing or that thing which such a lord is used to have ; ' twere best your lordship went up to the farm , no long way off , for you can see the chimneys , and there they have lots of everything .
" halvor wouldn ' t hear of it — he wanted to stop ; but the old couple stuck to their own , that he had better go to the farmer ' s ; there he would get both meat and drink ; as for them , they hadn ' t even a chair to offer him to sit down on .
" no ," said halvor , " i won ' t go up there till to - morrow early , but let me just stay here to - night ; worst come to the worst , i can sit in the chimney corner .
" well , they couldn ' t say anything against that ; so halvor sat down by the ingle , and began to poke about in the ashes , just as he used to do when he lay at home in old days , and stretched his lazy bones . well , they chattered and talked about many things ; and they told halvor about this thing and that ; and so he asked them if they had never had any children .
" yes , yes , they had once a lad whose name was halvor , but they didn ' t know whither he had wandered ; they couldn ' t even tell whether he were dead or alive .
"" couldn ' t it be me now ?"
said halvor .
" let me see ; i could tell him well enough ," said the old wife , and rose up .
" our halvor was so lazy and dull , he never did a thing ; and besides , he was so ragged , that one tatter took hold of the next tatter on him .
no ; there never was the making of such a fine fellow in him as you are , master .
" a little while after the old wife went to the hearth to poke up the fire , and when the blaze fell on halvor ' s face , just as when he was at home of old poking about in the ashes , she knew him at once ." ah !
but is it you after all , halvor ?"
she cried ; and then there was such joy for the old couple , there was no end to it ; and he was forced to tell how he had fared , and the old dame was so fond and proud of him , nothing would do but he must go up at once to the farmer ' s and show himself to the lassies , who had always looked down on him .
and off she went first , and halvor followed after .
so , when she got up there , she told them all how her halvor had come home again , and now they should only just see how grand he was , for , said she , " he looks like nothing but a king ' s son .
"" all very fine ," said the lassies , and tossed up their heads .
" we ' ll be bound he ' s just the same beggarly , ragged boy he always was .
" just then in walked halvor , and then the lassies were all so taken aback , they forgot their sarks in the ingle , where they were sitting darning their clothes , and ran out in their smocks .
well , when they were got back again , they were so shamefaced they scarce dared look at halvor , towards whom they had always been proud and haughty .
" ay , ay ," said halvor , " you always thought yourselves so pretty and neat , no one could come near you ; but now you should just see the eldest princess i have set free ; against her you look just like milkmaids , and the midmost is prettier still ; but the youngest , who is my sweetheart , she ' s fairer than both sun and moon .
would to heaven she were only here ," said halvor , " then you ' d see what you would see .
" he had scarce uttered these words before there they stood , but then he felt so sorry , for now what they had said came into his mind .
up at the farm there was a great feast got ready for the princesses , and much was made of them , but they wouldn ' t stop there .
" no ; we want to go down to your father and mother ," they said to halvor ; " and so we ' ll go out now and look about us .
" so he went down with them , and they came to a great lake just outside the farm .
close by the water was such a lovely green bank ; here the princesses said they would sit and rest a while ; they thought it so sweet to sit down and look over the water . so they sat down there , and when they had sat a while , the youngest princess said ,—" i may as well comb your hair a little , halvor .
" yes , halvor laid his head on her lap , and so she combed his bonny locks , and it wasn ' t long before halvor fell fast asleep .
then she took the ring from his finger , and put another in its stead ; and so she said ,—" now hold me all together !
and now would we were all in soria moria castle .
" so when halvor woke up , he could very well tell that he had lost the princesses , and began to weep and wail ; and he was so downcast , they couldn ' t comfort him at all .
in spite of all his father and mother said , he wouldn ' t stop there , but took farewell of them , and said he was safe not to see them again ; for if he couldn ' t find the princesses again , he thought it not worth while to live . well , he had still three hundred dollars left , so he put them into his pocket , and set out on his way .
so when he had walked a while , he met a man with a tidy horse , and he wanted to buy it , and began to chaffer with the man .
" ay ," said the man , " to tell the truth , i never thought of selling him ; but if we could strike a bargain , perhaps "—" what do you want for him ," asked halvor .
" i didn ' t give much for him , nor is he worth much ; he ' s a brave horse to ride , but he can ' t draw at all ; still he ' s strong enough to carry your knapsack and you too , turn and turn about ," said the man . at last they agreed on the price , and halvor laid the knapsack on him , and so he walked a bit , and rode a bit , turn and turn about .
at night he came to a green plain where stood a great tree , at the roots of which he sat down .
there he let the horse loose , but he didn ' t lie down to sleep , but opened his knapsack and took a meal .
at peep of day off he set again , for he could take no rest .
so he rode and walked , and walked and rode the whole day through the wide wood , where there were so many green spots and glades that shone so bright and lovely between the trees .
he didn ' t know at all where he was or whither he was going , but he gave himself no more time to rest , than when his horse cropped a bit of grass , and he took a snack out of his knapsack when they came to one of those green glades .
so he went on walking and riding by turns , and as for the wood there seemed to be no end to it . but at dusk the next day he saw a light gleaming away through the trees .
" would there were folk hereaway ," thought halvor , " that i might warm myself a bit and get a morsel to keep body and soul together .
" when he got up to it , he saw the light came from a wretched little hut , and through the window he saw an old old couple inside .
they were as grey - headed as a pair of doves , and the old wife had such a nose !
why , it was so long she used it for a poker to stir the fire as she sat in the ingle .
" good evening ," said halvor .
" good evening ," said the old wife .
" but what errand can you have in coming hither ?"
she went on , " for no christian folk have been here these hundred years and more .
" well , halvor told her all about himself , and how he wanted to get to soria moria castle , and asked if she knew the way thither .
" no ," said the old wife , " that i don ' t , but see now , here comes the moon , i ' ll ask her , she ' ll know all about it , for doesn ' t she shine on everything .
" so when the moon stood clear and bright over the tree - tops , the old wife went out .
" thou moon , thou moon ," she screamed , " canst thou tell me the way to soria moria castle ?
"" no ," said the moon , " that i can ' t , for the last time i shone there a cloud stood before me .
"" wait a bit still ," said the old wife to halvor , " by and by comes the west wind ; he ' s sure to know it , for he puffs and blows round every corner .
"" nay , nay ," said the old wife when she went out again , you don ' t mean to say you ' ve got a horse too ; just turn the poor beastie loose in our ' toun ,' and don ' t let him stand there and starve to death at the door .
" then she ran on ,—" but won ' t you swop him away to me ; we ' ve got an old pair of boots here , with which you can take twenty miles at each stride ; those you shall have for your horse , and so you ' ll get all the sooner to soria moria castle .
" that halvor was willing to do at once ; and the old wife was so glad at the horse , she was ready to dance and skip for joy .
" for now ," she said , " i shall be able to ride to church .
i too , think of that .
" as for halvor , he had no rest , and wanted to be off at once , but the old wife said there was no hurry .
" lie down on the bench with you and sleep a bit , for we ' ve no bed to offer you , and i ' ll watch and wake you when the west wind comes .
" so after a while up came the west wind , roaring and howling along till the walls creaked and groaned again . out ran the old wife .
" thou west wind , thou west wind !
canst thou tell me the way to soria moria castle ?
here ' s one who wants to get thither .""
yes , i know it very well ," said the west wind , " and now i ' m just off thither to dry clothes for the wedding that ' s to be ; if he ' s swift of foot he can go along with me .
" out ran halvor .
" you ' ll have to stretch your legs if you mean to keep up ," said the west wind . so off he set over field and hedge , and hill and fell , and halvor had hard work to keep up .
" well ," said the west wind , " now i ' ve no time to stay with you any longer , for i ' ve got to go away yonder and tear down a strip of spruce wood first before i go to the bleaching - ground to dry the clothes ; but if you go alongside the hill you ' ll come to a lot of lassies standing washing clothes , and then you ' ve not far to go to soria moria castle .
" in a little while halvor came upon the lassies who stood washing , and they asked if he had seen anything of the west wind , who was to come and dry the clothes for the wedding .
" ay , ay , that i have ," said halvor , " he ' s only gone to tear down a strip of spruce wood .
it ' ll not be long before he ' s here ," and then he asked them the way to soria moria castle . so they put him into the right way , and when he got to the castle it was full of folk and horses ; so full it made one giddy to look at them .
but halvor was so ragged and torn from having followed the west wind through bush and brier and bog , that he kept on one side , and wouldn ' t show himself till the last day when the bridal feast was to be . so when all , as was then right and fitting , were to drink the bride and bridegroom ' s health and wish them luck , and when the cupbearer was to drink to them all again , both knights and squires , last of all he came in turn to halvor .
he drank their health , but let the ring which the princess had put upon his finger as he lay by the lake fall into the glass , and bade the cupbearer go and greet the bride and hand her the glass . then up rose the princess from the board at once .
" who is most worthy to have one of us ," she said , " he that has set us free , or he that here sits by me as bride - groom .
" well they all said there could be but one voice and will as to that , and when halvor heard that he wasn ' t long in throwing off his beggar ' s rags , and arraying himself as bride - groom .
" ay , ay , here is the right one after all ," said the youngest princess as soon as she saw him , and so she tossed the other one out of the window , and held her wedding with halvor .
