once on a time there was a goody who had a deaf husband .
a good easy man he was , but that was just why she thought more of the lad next door , whom they called " tom totherhouse ."
now the lad that served the deaf man saw very well that the two had something between them , and one day he said to the goody ,—" dare you wager ten dollars , mother , that i don ' t make you lay bare your own shame ?
"" yes , i dare ," said she ; and so they wagered ten dollars . so one day , while the lad and the deaf man stood thrashing in the barn , the lad saw that tom totherhouse came to see the goody .
he said nothing , but a good while before dinner - time he turned toward the barn - door , and bawled out " halloa !"" what !
are we to go home already ?"
said the man , who hadn ' t given any heed to what the lad did .
" yes , we must , since mother calls ," said the lad . so when they got into the passage , the lad began to hem and cough , that the goody might get tom totherhouse out of the way .
but when they came into the room , there stood a whole bowl of custards on the table .
" nay , nay , mother ," cried out the man , " shall we have custards to - day ?
"" yes , that you shall , dear ," said the goody ; but she was as sour as verjuice , and as cross as two sticks . so when they had eaten and drank all the good cheer up , off they went again to their work , and the goody said to tom ,—" deil take that lad ' s sharp nose , this was all his fault ; but now you must be off as fast as you can , and i ' ll come down to you in the mead with a snack between meals .
" this the lad stood outside in the passage and listened to .
" do you know , father ," he said , " i think we ' d best go down into the hollow and put our fence to rights , which is blown down , before the neighbours ' swine get in and root up our meadow .
"" ay , ay , let ' s go and do it ," said the man ; for he did all he was told , good , easy man . so when the afternoon was half spent , down came the goody sneaking along into the mead , with something under her apron .
" nay , nay , mother ," said the man , " it can ' t be you any longer ; are we to have a snack between meals too ?
"" yes , yes , that you shall ," she said : but she was sourer and wilder than ever . so they made merry , and crammed themselves with bannocks and butter , and had a drop of brandy into the bargain .
" i ' ll go off to tom totherhouse with a snack — shan ' t i mother ?"
said the lad .
" he ' s had nothing between meals , i ' ll be bound ."" ah !
do ; there ' s a good fellow ," said the goody , who all at once got as mild as milk . as he went along the lad broke a bannock to bits , and dropped the crumbs here and there as he walked .
but when he got to tom totherhouse he said —" now , just you take care , for our old cock has found out that you come too often to see our goody .
he won ' t stand it any longer , and has sworn to drive his axe into you as soon as ever he can set eyes on you .
" as for tom , he was so frightened he scarce knew which way to turn , and the lad went back again to his master .
" there ' s something wrong ," he said , " with tom ' s plough , and he begs you to be so good as to take your axe , and go and see if you can ' t set it right .
" yes , the man set off with his axe , but tom totherhouse had scarce caught sight of him , before he took to his heels as fast as he could .
the man turned and twisted the plough round and round , and looked at it on every side , and when he couldn ' t see anything wrong with it he went off home again ; but on the way he picked up the bits of broken bannock which the lad had let fall .
his old dame stood in the meadow and looked at him as he did this for a while , and wondered and wondered what it could be her husband was gathering up .
" oh , i know ," said the lad , " master ' s picking up stones , i ' ll be bound ; for he has marked how often this tom totherhouse runs over here ; and the old fellow won ' t stand it any longer ; and now he has sworn to stone mother to death .
" off went the goody as fast as her legs could carry her .
" what in the world is it that mother is running after now ?"
asked the man , when he reached the spot where she had stood .
" oh ," said the lad , " maybe the house at home is on fire ?
" so there ran the husband behind and the goody before ; and as she ran she screeched out ,—" ah !
ah !
don ' t stone me to death ; don ' t stone me to death !
and i ' ll give you my word never to let tom totherhouse come near me again .
"" now the ten dollars are mine ," bawled out the lad ; and so they were .
