once on a time there was a king who had so many geese , he was forced to have a lassie to tend them and watch them ; her name was annie , and so they called her " annie the goose - girl ."
now you must know there was a king ' s son from england who went out to woo ; and as he came along annie sat herself down in his way .
" sitting all alone there , you little annie ?"
said the king ' s son .
" yes ," said little annie , " here i sit and put stitch to stitch and patch on patch .
i ' m waiting to - day for the king ' s son from england .
"" him you mustn ' t look to have ," said the prince .
" nay , but if i ' m to have him ," said little annie , " have him i shall after all .
" and now limners were sent out into all lands and realms to take the likenesses of the fairest princesses , and the prince was to choose between them .
so he thought so much of one of them , that he set out to seek her , and wanted to wed her , and he was glad and happy when he got her for his sweetheart . but now i must tell you this prince had a stone with him which he laid by his bedside , and that stone knew everything , and when the princess came little annie told her , if so be she ' d had a sweetheart before , or didn ' t feel herself quite free from anything which she didn ' t wish the prince to know , she ' d better not step on that stone which lay by the bedside .
" if you do , it will tell him all about you ," said little annie . so when the princess heard that she was dreadfully downcast , and she fell upon the thought to ask annie if she would get into bed that night in her stead and lie down by the prince ' s side , and then when he was sound asleep , annie should get out and the princess should get in , and so when he woke up in the morning he would find the right bride by his side . so they did that , and when annie the goose - girl came and stepped upon the stone the prince asked ,—" who is this that steps into my bed ?
"" a maid pure and bright ," said the stone , and so they lay down to sleep ; but when the night wore on the princess came and lay down in annie ' s stead . but next morning , when they were to get up , the prince asked the stone again ,—" who is this that steps out of my bed ?
"" one that has had three bairns ," said the stone . when the prince heard that he wouldn ' t have her , you may know very well ; and so he packed her off home again , and took another sweetheart . but as he went to see her , little annie went and sat down in his way again .
" sitting all alone there , little annie , the goose - girl ," said the prince .
" yes , here i sit , and put stitch to stitch , and patch on patch ; for i ' m waiting to - day for the king ' s son from england ," said annie ." oh !
you mustn ' t look to have him ," said the king ' s son .
" nay , but if i ' m to have him , have him i shall , after all ;" that was what annie thought . well , it was the same story over again with the prince ; only this time , when his bride got up in the morning , the stone said she ' d had six bairns . so the prince wouldn ' t have her either , but sent her about her business ; but still he thought he ' d try once more if he couldn ' t find one who was pure and spotless ; and he sought far and wide in many lands , till at last he found one he thought he might trust .
but when he went to see her , little annie the goose - girl had put herself in his way .
" sitting all alone there , you little annie , the goose - girl ," said the prince .
" yes , here i sit , and put stitch to stitch , and patch on patch ; for i ' m waiting to - day for the king ' s son from england ," said annie .
" him you mustn ' t look to have ," said the prince .
" nay , but if i ' m to have him , have him i shall , after all ," said little annie . so when the princess came , little annie the goose - girl told her the same as she had told the other two , if she ' d had any sweetheart before , or if there was anything else she didn ' t wish the prince to know , she mustn ' t tread on the stone that the prince had put at his bedside ; for , said she ,—" it tells him everything .
" the princess got very red and downcast when she heard that , for she was just as naughty as the others , and asked annie if she would go in her stead and lie down with the prince that night ; and when he was sound asleep , she would come and take her place , and then he would have the right bride by his side when it was light next morning . yes !
they did that .
and when little annie the goose - girl came and stepped upon the stone , the prince asked ,—" who is this that steps into my bed .
"" a maid pure and bright ," said the stone ; and so they lay down to rest . farther on in the night the prince put a ring on annie ' s finger , and it fitted so tight she couldn ' t got it off again ; for the prince saw well enough there was something wrong , and so he wished to have a mark by which he might know the right woman again . well , when the prince had gone off to sleep , the princess came and drove annie away to the pigstye , and lay down in her place .
next morning , when they were to get up , the prince asked —" who is this that steps out of my bed ?
"" one , that ' s had nine bairns ," said the stone . when the prince heard that he drove her away at once , for he was in an awful rage ; and then he asked the stone how it all was with these princesses who had stepped on it , for he couldn ' t understand it at all , he said . so the stone told him how they had cheated him , and sent little annie the goose - girl to him in their stead . but as the prince wished to have no mistake about it , he went down to her where she sat tending her geese , for he wanted to see if she had the ring too , and he thought , " if she has it , ' twere best to take her at once for my queen .
" so when he got down he saw in a moment that she had tied a bit of rag round one of her fingers , and so he asked her why it was tied up ." oh !
i ' ve cut myself so badly ," said little annie the goose - girl . so he must and would see the finger , but annie wouldn ' t take the rag off .
then he caught hold of the finger ; but annie , she tried to pull it from him , and so between them the rag came off , and then he knew his ring . so he took her up to the palace , and gave her much fine clothes and attire , and after that they held their wedding feast ; and so little annie the goose - girl came to have the king of england ' s son for her husband after all , just because it was written that she should have him .
