once on a time there was a poor man who had three sons .
when he died the two eldest were to go out into the world to try their luck ; but as for the youngest they would not have him at any price .
' as for you ,' they said , ' you are fit for nothing but to sit and hold fir tapers , and grub in the ashes and blow up the embers .
that ' s what you are fit for .
'' well , well ,' said boots , ' then i must e ' en go alone by myself : at any rate i shan ' t fall out with my company .
' so the two went their way , and when they had travelled some days they came to a great wood .
there they sat down to rest , and were just going to take out a meal from their knapsack , for they were both tired and hungry .
so as they sat there up came an old hag out of a hillock , and begged for a morsel of meat .
she was so old and feeble that her nose and mouth met , and she nodded with her head , and could only walk with a stick .
as for meat she had not had , she said , a morsel in her mouth these hundred years .
but the lads only laughed at her , and ate on and told her as she had lived so long on nothing , she might very well hold out the rest of her life , even though she did not eat up their scanty fare , for they had little to eat and nothing to spare . so when they had eaten their fill and could eat no more , and were quite rested , they went on their way again , and , sooner or later , they came to the king ' s grange , and there they each of them got a place . a while after they had started from home , boots gathered together the crumbs which his brothers had thrown on one side , and put them into his little scrip , and he took with him the old gun which had no lock , for he thought it might be some good on the way ; and so he set off .
so when he had wandered some days , he too came into the big wood , through which his brothers had passed , and as he got tired and hungry , he sat down under a tree that he might rest and eat ; but he had his eyes about him for all that , and as he opened his scrip he saw a picture hanging on a tree , and on it was painted the likeness of a young girl or princess , whom he thought so lovely he couldn ' t keep his eyes off her .
so he forgot both food and scrip , and took down the painting and lay and stared at it .
just then came up the old hag out of the hillock , who hobbled along with her stick , whose nose and mouth met , and whose head nodded .
then she begged for a little food , for she hadn ' t had a morsel of bread in her mouth for a hundred years .
that was what she said .
' then it ' s high time you had a little to live on , granny ,' said the lad ; and with that he gave her some of the crumbs he had .
the old hag said no one had ever called her ' granny ' these hundred years , and she would be as a mother to him in her turn .
then she gave him a grey ball of wool , which he had only to roll on before him and he would come to whatever place he wished ; but as for the painting she said he mustn ' t bother himself about that , he would only fall into ill luck if he did .
as for boots , he thought it was very kind of her to say that , but he could not bear to be without the painting , so he took it under his arm and rolled the ball of wool before him , and it was not long before he came to the king ' s grange , where his brothers served .
there he too begged for a place , but all the answer he got was they had nothing to put him to , for they had just got two new serving men .
but as he begged so prettily , at last he got leave to be with the coachman , and learn how to groom and handle horses .
that he was right glad to do , for he was fond of horses , and he was both quick and ready , so that he soon learnt how to bed and rub them down , and it was not long before every one in the king ' s grange was fond of him ; but every hour he had to himself he was up in the loft looking at the picture , for he had hung it up in a corner of the hay - loft . as for his brothers , they were dull and lazy , and so they often got scolding and stripes , and when they saw that boots fared better than they , they got jealous of him , and told the coachman he was a worshipper of false gods , for he prayed to a picture and not to our lord .
now , even though the coachman thought well of the lad , still he wasn ' t long before he told the king what he had heard .
but the king only swore and snapped at him , for he had grown very sad and sorrowful since his daughters had been carried off by trolls .
but they so dinned it into the king ' s ears , that at last he must and would know what it was that the lad did .
but when he went up into the hay - loft and set his eyes on the picture , he saw it was his youngest daughter who was painted on it .
but when the brothers of boots heard that , they were ready with an answer , and said to the coachman ,' if our brother only would , he has said he was good to get the king ' s daughter back .
' you may fancy it was not long before the coachman went to the king with this story , and when the king heard it , he called for boots , and said ,' your brothers say you can bring back my daughter again , and now you must do it .
' boots answered , he had never known it was the king ' s daughter till the king said so himself , and if he could free her and fetch her he would be sure to do his best ; but two days he must have to think over it and fit himself out .
yes , he might have two days . so boots took the grey ball of wool and threw it down on the road , and it rolled and rolled before him , and he followed it till he came to the old hag , from whom he had got it .
her he asked what he must do , and she said he must take with him that old gun of his and three hundred chests of nails and horseshoe brads , and three hundred barrels of barley , and three hundred barrels of grits , and three hundred carcases of pigs , and three hundred beeves , and then he was to roll the ball of wool before him till he met a raven and a baby troll , and then he would be all right , for they were both of her stock .
yes , the lad did as she bade him ; he went right on to the king ' s grange , and took his old gun with him , and he asked the king for the nails and the brads , and meat and flesh , and grain , and for horses and men , and carts to carry them in .
the king thought it was a good deal to ask , but if he could only get his daughter back , he might have whatever he chose , even to the half of his kingdom . so when the lad had fitted himself out , he rolled the ball of wool before him again , and he hadn ' t gone many days before he came to a high hill , and there sat a raven , up in a fir tree .
so boots went on till he came close under the tree , and then he began to aim and point at the raven with his gun .
' no , no ,' cried the raven , ' don ' t shoot me , don ' t shoot me , and i ' ll help you .
'' well ,' said boots , ' i never heard of anyone who boasted he had eaten roast raven , and since you are so eager to save your life , i may just as well spare it .
' so he threw down his gun , and the raven came flying down to him , and said ,' here , up on this fell there is a baby troll walking up and down , for he has lost his way and can ' t get down again .
i will help you up , and then you can lead him home , and ask a boon which will stand you in good stead .
when you get to the troll ' s house he will offer you all the grandest things he has , but you should not heed them a pin .
mind you take nothing else but the little grey ass which stands behind the stable door .
' then the raven took boots on his back and flew up on the hill with him , and put him off there .
when he had gone about on it a bit , he heard the baby troll howling and whining , because it couldn ' t get down again .
so the lad talked kindly to it , and they got the best friends in the world , and he said he would help it down and guide it to the old troll ' s house , that it mightn ' t lose itself on the way back .
then they went to the raven , and he took them both on his back , and carried them off the hill troll ' s house . and when the old troll saw his baby , he was so glad he was beside himself , and told boots he might come indoors and take whatever he chose , because he had freed his child .
then they offered him both gold and silver , and all that was rare and costly ; but the lad said he would rather have a horse than anything else .
yes , he should have a horse , the troll said , and off they went to the stable .
it was full of the grandest horses , whose coats shone like the sun and moon ; but boots thought they were all too big for him .
so he peeped behind the stable door , and when he set eyes on the little grey ass that stood there , he said ,' i ' ll take this one .
it will suit me to a t , and if i fall off i shall be no farther from the ground than that ---- high .
' the old troll did not at all like to part with his ass , but as he had given his word he had to stand by it .
so boots got the ass , and saddle , and bridle , and all that belonged to it , and then he set off .
they travelled through wood and field , and over fells and wide wastes .
so when they had gone farther than far , the ass asked boots if he saw anything .
' no , i see naught else than a hill , which looks blue in the distance ,' said boots .
' oh ,' said the ass , ' that hill we have to pass through .
'' all very fine , i daresay ,' said boots , for he didn ' t believe a word of it . so when they got close to the hill , an unicorn came tearing along at them , just as if he were going to eat them up all alive .
' i almost think now i ' m afraid ,' said boots .
' oh ,' said the ass , ' don ' t say so ; just throw it a score or so of beeves , and beg it to bore a hole , and break a way for us through the hill .
' so boots did as he was told , and when the unicorn had eaten his fill , they said they would give him a score or two of pigs ' carcasses , if he would go before them and bore a hole in the hill , so that they might get through it .
so when he heard that he set to work and bored the hole , and broke a way so fast that they had hard work to keep up with him , and when he had done his work they threw him two score of pigs . so when they had got well out of that they travelled far away , until they passed again through woods and fields and across fells and wide wastes .
' do you see anything now ?'
asked the ass .
' now i see naught but the bare sky and wild fells ,' said boots . so they travelled on far and farther than far , and the higher up they came the fell got smoother and flatter , so that they could see farther about them .
' do you see anything now ?'
said the ass .
' yes , i see something far , far away ,' said boots , ' and it gleams and twinkles like a little star .
'' it ' s not so very little for all that ,' said the ass . so when they had gone on farther and farther than far again , the ass asked again ,' do you see anything now ?
'' yes ,' said boots , ' i see something a long way off , that shines like a moon .
'' it is no moon ,' said the ass , ' but the silver castle we are bound for .
now , when we get there you will see three dragons lying on the watch before the gate .
they have not been awakened for hundreds of years , and so the moss has grown over their eyes .
'' i almost think i shall be afraid of them ,' said boots .
' oh , don ' t say that ,' said the ass , ' you ' ve only got to wake up the youngest , and throw it a score or so of beeves and swine , and then it will talk to the others , and so you ' ll come into the castle .
' so on they travelled far and farther than far again before they came up to the castle , but when they reached it it was both grand and great , and everything they saw was cast in silver , and outside the gate lay the dragons , and blocked up the way so that no one could get in ; but they had a nice easy time of it , and had not been much troubled in their watch ; for they were so overgrown with moss that no one could tell what they were made of , and at their sides underwood was springing up between the tufts of moss .
so boots woke up the youngest of them , and it began to rub its eyes and clear the moss out of them .
but when the dragon saw there was folk there , he came at them with his maw wide a - gape ; but then the lad stood ready , and tossed into it the carcasses of beeves , and swung after them salted swine , till the dragon had got his fill , and grew a little more sensible to talk to .
then the lad begged he would wake up his fellows , and ask them to be so good as to get out of the way , so that he might get into the castle ; but the dragon neither would nor dared to do that at first , for he said , as they had not been awake or tasted anything for hundreds of years , he was afraid lest they should get raving mad , and swallow up everything alive or dead . but boots thought there was no need to fear that , for they could leave behind them a hundred carcasses of beeves , and a hundred salt swine , and go a little way off and then the dragons would have time to eat their fill , and to come to themselves before the others came back to the castle . yes , the dragon was ready to do that , and so they did it ; but before the dragons were well awake , and got the moss rubbed off their eyes ; they went about roaring and raving , and riving and rending at everything alive or dead , so that the youngest dragon had enough to do to shield himself from them till they had snuffed up the smell of flesh .
then they swallowed down whole oxen and swine , and ate and ate till they were full .
and after that they were just as tame and buxom as the youngest , and let boots pass between them into the castle . when he got inside it was all so grand he never could have thought anything could be so good anywhere ; but there was not a soul in it , for he went from room to room , and opened all the doors , but he could see no one .
well , at last he peeped through a door that led to a bedroom , which he had not seen before , and in there sat a princess , spinning , and she was so glad and happy when she saw him .
' no , no ,' she cried , ' can it be that christian folk dare to come hither ?
but it will be best for you to be off again , else the troll might kill you , for you must know a troll lives with three heads .
' but boots said he would not fly even if he had seven heads .
when the princess heard that , she said she wished him to try if he could brandish the great rusty sword that hung behind the door .
no , he could not brandish it , he could not so much as even lift it .
' ah ,' said the princess , ' if you can ' t do that you must take a drink of that flask yonder , that hangs by the side of the sword , for that ' s what the troll does when he goes out to use it .
' so boots took two or three drinks , and then he could brandish the sword as though it were a rolling pin . just then came the troll , so that the wind sung after him .' hu !'
he screeched out , ' what a smell of christian blood there is in here .
'' i know there is ,' said boots , ' but you needn ' t blow and snort so at it ; you shan ' t suffer long from that smell ,' and in a trice he cut off all his heads . the princess was so glad , just as if she had got something so good ; but in a little while she got heavy - hearted , for she pined for her sister , who had been stolen by a troll with six heads , and lived in a golden castle three hundred miles on this side of the world ' s end .
boots thought that was not so very bad , for he could go and fetch both the princess and the castle ; and so he took the sword and the flask , and got on the ass , and bade the dragons follow him , and carry the meat , and grain , and nails which he had . so when they had been a while on the way , and had travelled far , far away over land and strand , the ass said one day ,' do you see anything ?
'' i see naught ,' said boots , ' but land and water and bare sky and high crags .
' so they went on far and farther than far , and then the ass said again ,' do you see anything now ?
'' yes ,' when he had looked well before him , he saw something a long , long way off , that shone like a little star .
' it will be big enough by - and - by ,' said the ass . when they had gone a good bit still , the ass asked ,' do you see anything now ?
'' now i see it shining like a moon ,' said the lad .
' ay , ay ,' said the ass , and on they went . so when they had gone far , and farther than far away , over land and strand , and hill and heath , the ass asked ,' do you see anything now ?
'' now , methinks ,' said boots , ' it shines most like the sun .
'' ay ,' said the ass , ' that ' s the golden castle for which we are bound ; but outside it lives a worm , which stops the way and keeps watch and ward .
'' i think i shall be afraid of it ,' said boots .
' oh , don ' t say so ,' said the ass , ' we must spread over it heaps of boughs , and lay between them layers of horseshoe brads and nails , and set fire to them all , and so we shall be rid of it .
' so after a long , long time they came up to where the castle hung in the air , but the worm lay underneath it and stopped the way .
so the lad gave the dragons a good meal of beeves and salted swine , that they might help him , and they spread over the worm heaps of boughs and wood , and laid between them layers of nails and brads , till they had used up the three hundred chests , and when it was all done they set fire to the pile and burned up the worm alive , in a fire at white heat . so when they had done with him one dragon flew under the castle and lifted it up , and the two others went up high , high into the air , and unloosed the links and hooks by which it hung , and so they lowered it down and set it on the ground .
when that was done boots went inside , and there it was grander far than in the silvern castle , but he could see no folk till he came to the innermost room , and there lay a princess on a bed of gold .
she slept so sound , as though she were dead , but she was not , though he was not able to wake her up , for her face was as red and white as milk and blood .
and just as boots stood there gazing at her , back came the troll tearing along .
as soon as he put his first head through the door he screamed out ,' hu !
what a smell of christian blood there is in here .
'' maybe ,' said boots , ' but you ' ve no need to smell and snort about that ; you shan ' t suffer long from it .
' and with that he cut off all his heads , as though they stood on a kail stalk . so the dragons took the golden castle on their backs and went home with it -- i fancy they were not long on the way -- and set it down side by side with the silvern castle , so that it shone both far and wide . now when the princess of the silvern castle came to her window in the morning , and caught sight of it , she was so glad that she sprang over to the golden castle at once ; but when she saw her sister lying there and sleeping as though she were dead , she said to boots that they would never get life into her before they found the water of life and death , and that stood in two wells on either side of a golden castle which hung in the air , nine hundred miles beyond the world ' s end , and where the third sister dwelt . well , boots thought there was no help for it ; he must go and fetch it , and it was not long before he was on his way .
so he travelled far and farther than far , through many realms , across wood and field , over fell and firth , along hill and heath , and at last he got to the world ' s end , and after that he travelled far , far over crags and wastes and high rocks .
' do you see anything ?'
asked the ass one day .
' i see naught but heaven and earth ,' said the lad .
' do you see anything now ?'
asked the ass again , when some days were past .
' yes ,' said boots , ' now i see something that glimmers very high up , far , far away , like a little star .
'' it ' s not so little for all that ,' said the ass . so when they had travelled on a while , the ass asked ,' do you see anything now ?
'' yes ,' said boots , ' now it shines like the sun .
'' that ' s whither we are bound ,' said the ass ; ' it ' s the golden castle that hangs in the air , and there lives a princess who has been stolen by a troll with nine heads ; but all the wild beasts there are in the world lie on watch , and stop the way thither .
'' uf ,' said boots , ' i almost think i ' m afraid of them .
'' don ' t say so ,' said the ass ; and then he told him there was no danger , if he would only make up his mind not to linger there , but to set off on his way back as soon as ever he had filled his flasks with the water , for there was no going thither but during one hour in the day , and that began at high noon ; but if he were not man enough to be ready in time and to get away , the beasts would tear him into a thousand pieces . well , boots said he would be sure to do that , he would not think of staying too long . at the stroke of twelve they reached the castle , and there lay all the wild and savage beasts that ever were , as it were a fence before the gate , and on either side of the way .
but they all slumbered like stocks and stones , and there wasn ' t one of them that so much as lifted a paw .
so boots passed between them , and took good heed not to tread on their toes or the tips of their tails , and he filled his flasks with the waters of life and death , and while he did that he looked up at the castle , which was as though it were cast in pure gold .
it was the grandest he had ever seen , and he thought it would be grander still inside than out .
' stuff ,' thought boots , ' i have time enough , i can always look about me in half an hour ,' and so he opened the door and went in .
well , inside it was grander than grand itself , and as he went out of one gorgeous room into another , it was as if it was all made of gold and pearls , and everything that was costliest in the world .
folk there were none ; but at last he came into a bedroom where there lay another princess on a bed of gold , just as though she were dead too , but she was as grand as the grandest queen , and as red and white as blood on snow , and so lovely he had never seen anything so lovely but her picture ; for she it was that was painted on it . then boots forgot both the water he was to fetch , and the wild beasts , and the castle and everything , and could only gaze at the princess ; and he thought he could never have his fill of looking at her ; but all the while she slept as though she were dead , and he was not able to wake her up . so when it drew towards evening , the troll came tearing along so that the wind sung after him , and he rattled and slammed the gates and doors till the whole castle rang again .
' huf ,' he cried ; ' what a strong smell of christian blood there is in here ;' and then he stuck his first head inside the door and snuffed up the air .
' i daresay there is ,' said boots , ' but you ' ve no need to puff and blow as though you were about to burst , for it shan ' t vex you long ;' and as he said that he cut off all his nine heads .
but when he had done that he got so weary he couldn ' t keep his eyes open .
so he laid him down on the bed by the side of the princess , and all the while she slept both night and day , as though she would never wake again ; only at midnight she just woke up for the twinkling of an eye , and then she told him that he had set her free , but she must bide there three years still , and if she didn ' t come home to him then he must just come and fetch her . when the clock began to go towards one next day , boots woke for the first time , and the first thing he heard was the ass braying and screaming and making a stir , and so he thought he would get up and set off home , but before he went he cut a breadth out of the princess ' s skirt , and took it away with him .
and however it was , he had loitered so long there that the beasts began to wake and stir , and by the time he had mounted his ass they stood in a ring round him , so that he thought it had rather a ghastly look .
but the ass said he must sprinkle on them a few drops of the water of death , and he did so , and in a trice they all fell headlong on the spot , and never stirred a limb more . as they were on their way home , the ass said to boots ,--' now when you come to honour and glory , see if you don ' t forget me and all i have done for you , so that i shall be broken - kneed for hunger .
'' nay , nay !
that should never be ,' said the lad . so when he got home to the princess with the water of life , she sprinkled a few drops over her sister , and woke her up , and then there was such great joy and they were so happy .
then they travelled home to the king , and he too was glad and joyful , because he had got those two back ; but still he went about longing and longing that the three years might pass away , and his youngest daughter come home . as for boots , who had brought them back , the king made him a mighty man , so that he was the first in the land after the king himself .
but there were many who were jealous that he should have grown to be such a man of mark , and one of them was ritter red , who they did say wished to have the eldest princess , and he got her to sprinkle over boots a little of the water of death , so that he swooned off and lay as dead . so when the three years were over , and a bit of the fourth was gone , there came sailing up a strange ship of war , and on board was the third sister , and with her she had a boy three years old .
she sent word up to the king ' s grange , and said she would not set her foot on land till they had sent him who had been in the golden castle and set her free .
so they sent down to her one of the highest men about the court , the master of the ceremonies himself ; and when he came on board the princess ' ship , he took off his hat and bowed and scraped , and bent himself before her .
' can that be your father ?
my son ,' said the princess to her boy , who was playing with a golden apple .
' no ,' said the child , ' my father doesn ' t crawl about like a cheesemite .
' so they sent another of the same stamp , and this time it was ritter red .
but it fared no better with him than with the first one , and the princess sent word by him , if they didn ' t make haste and send the right one , it should go ill with them .
when they heard that they were forced to wake up boots with the water of life ; and so he went down to the ship to the princess , but he didn ' t make too low a bow , i should think ; he only nodded his head and brought out the breadth he had cut out of the skirt of the princess in the golden castle .
' that ' s my father !
that ' s my father !'
bawled out the boy , and gave him the golden apple he was playing with . then there was great joy and mirth all over the realm , and the old king was the gladdest of all of them , because he had got his darling back again .
but when what ritter red and the eldest princess had done to boots came out , the king asked to have them both rolled down a hill , each in a cask full of spikes and nails ; but boots and the youngest princess begged hard for them , and so they got off with life . now it happened one day , as they were about to begin the bridal feast , that they stood looking out of window ,-- it was towards spring , just when they were turning out the horses and cows after the winter -- and the last that came out of the stable was the ass ; but it was so starved that it came out of the stable - door on its knees . then boots was cut to the heart because he had forgotten it , and he went down and did not know how to make it up to the poor beast .
but the ass said the best thing he could do was to cut his head off .
that he was very loath to do , but the ass begged so prettily that he had to yield , and did it at last ; and as soon as ever his head fell in the yard , it was all over with the shape which had been thrown over him by witchcraft , and there stood the handsomest prince any one cared to see .
he got the second princess to wife , and they fell to keeping the bridal feast , so that it was heard and talked of over seven kingdoms .
' then they built themselves houses , and stitched themselves shoon , and had so many bairnsthey reached up to the moon .'
