once on a time there was a man who had a daughter , and she was so pretty her name was spread over many kingdoms , and lovers came to her as thick as autumn leaves .
one of these made out that he was richer than all the rest ; and grand and handsome he was too ; so he was to have her , and after that he came over and over again to see her . as time went on , he said he should like her to come to his house and see how he lived ; he was sorry he could not fetch her and go with her , but the day she came he would strew peas all along the path right up to his house door ; but somehow or other it fell out that he strewed the peas a day too early . she set out and walked a long way , through wood and waste , and at last she came to a big grand house , which stood in a green field in the midst of the wood ; but her lover was not at home , nor was there a soul in the house either .
first , she went into the kitchen , and there she saw nothing but a strange bird which hung in a cage from the roof .
next she went into the parlour , and there everything was so fine it was beyond belief .
but as she went into it , the bird called after her ,--' pretty maiden , be bold , but not too bold .
' when she passed on into an inner room , the bird called out the same words .
there she saw ever so many chests of drawers , and when she pulled open the drawers , they were filled with gold and silver , and everything that was rich and rare .
when she went on into a second room the bird called out again ,--' pretty maiden !
be bold , but not too bold .
' in that room the walls were all hung round with women ' s dresses , till the room was crammed full .
she went on into a third room , and then the bird screamed out ,--' pretty maiden !
pretty maiden , be bold , but not too bold .
' and what do you think she saw there ?
why !
ever so many pails full of blood . so she passed on to a fourth room , and then the bird screamed and screeched after her ,--' pretty maiden !
pretty maiden , be bold , but not too bold .
'' that room was full of heaps of dead bodies , and skeletons of slain women , and the girl got so afraid that she was going to run away out of the house , but she had only got as far as the next room , where the pails of blood stood , when the bird called out to her ,--' pretty maiden !
pretty maiden !
jump under the bed , jump under the bed , for now he ' s coming .
' she was not slow to give heed to the bird , and to hide under the bed .
she crept as far back close to the wall as she could , for she was so afraid she would have crept into the wall itself , had she been able ! so in came her lover with another girl ; and she begged so prettily and so hard he would only spare her life , and then she would never say a word against him , but it was all no good .
he tore off all her clothes and jewels , down to a ring which she had on her finger .
that he pulled and tore at , but when he couldn ' t get it off he hacked off her finger , and it rolled away under the bed to the girl who lay there , and she took it up and kept it .
her sweetheart told a little boy who was with him , to creep under the bed and bring out the finger .
yes !
he bent down and crept under , and saw the girl lying there ; but she squeezed his hand hard , and then he saw what she meant .
' it lies so far under , i can ' t reach it ,' he cried .
' let it bide there till to - morrow , and then i ' ll fetch it out .
' early next morning the robber went out , and the boy was left behind to mind the house , and he then went to meet the girl to whom his master was betrothed , and who had come , as you know , by mistake the day before .
but before he went , the robber told him to be sure not to let her go into the two farthermost bed - rooms . so when he was well off in the wood , the boy went and said she might come out now .
' you were lucky , that you were ,' he said , ' in coming so soon , else he would have killed you like all the others .
' she did not stay there long , you may fancy , but hurried back home as quick as ever she could , and when her father asked her why she had come so soon , she told him what sort of a man her sweetheart was , and all that she had heard and seen . a short time after her lover came passing by that way , and he looked so grand that his raiment shone again , and he came to ask , he said , why she had never paid him that visit as she had promised .' oh !'
said her father ; ' there came a man in the way with a sledge and scattered the peas , and she couldn ' t find her way ; but now you must just put up with our poor house , and stay the night , for you must know we have guests coming , and it will be just a betrothal feast .
' so when they had all eaten and drunk , and still sat round the table , the daughter of the house said she had dreamt such a strange dream a few nights before .
if they cared to hear it she would tell it them , but they must all promise to sit quite still till she came to the end . yes !
they were all ready to hear , and they all promised to sit still , and her sweetheart as well .
' i dreamt i was walking along a broad path , and it was strewn with peas .'' yes !
yes !'
said her sweetheart ; ' just as it will be when you go to my house , my love .
'' then the path got narrower and narrower , and it went far , far away through wood and waste .
'' just like the way to my house , my love ,' said her sweetheart .
' and so i came to a green field , in which stood a big grand house .
'' just like my house , my love ,' said her sweetheart .
' so i went into the kitchen , but i saw no living soul , and from the roof hung a strange bird in a cage , and as i passed on into the parlour , it called after me , " pretty maiden , be bold , but not too bold .
"'' just like my house that too , my love !'
said her sweetheart .
' so i passed on into a bedroom , and the bird bawled after me the same words , and in there were so many chests of drawers , and when i pulled the drawers out and looked into them , they were filled with gold and silver stuffs , and everything that was grand .
'' that is just like it is at my house , my love ,' said her sweetheart .
' i , too , have many drawers full of gold and silver , and costly things .
'' so i went on into another bedroom , and the bird screeched out to me the very same words ; and that room was all hung round on the walls with fine dresses of women .
'' yes , that too , is just as it is in my house ,' he said ; ' there are dresses and finery there both of silk and satin .'' well !
when i passed on to the next bedroom , the bird began to screech and scream -- pretty maiden , pretty maiden !
be bold , but not too bold ; and in this room were casks and pails all round the walls , and they were full of blood .
'' fie ,' said her sweetheart , ' how nasty .
it isn ' t at all like that in my house , my love ,' for now he began to grow uneasy and wished to be off .' why !'
said the daughter , ' it ' s only a dream , you know , that i am telling .
sit still .
the least you can do is to hear my dream out .'
then she went on ,' when i went on into the next bedroom the bird began to scream out as loudly as before , the same words -- pretty maiden , pretty maiden !
be bold , but not too bold .
and there lay many dead bodies and skeletons of slain folk .'' no !
no ,' said her sweetheart , ' there ' s nothing like that in my house ,' and again he tried to run out .
' sit still , i say ,' she said , ' it is nothing else than a dream , and you may very well hear it out .
i , too , thought it dreadful , and ran back again , but i had not got farther than the next room where all those pails of blood stood , when the bird screeched out that i must jump under the bed and hide , for now he was coming ; and so he came , and with him he had a girl who was so lovely i thought i had never seen her like before .
she prayed and begged so prettily that he would spare her life .
but he did not care a pin for all her tears and prayers ; he tore off her clothes , and took all she had , and he neither spared her life nor aught else ; but on her left hand she had a ring , which he could not tear off , so he hacked off her finger , and it rolled away under the bed to me .'' indeed !
my love ,' said her sweetheart , ' there ' s nothing like that in my house .
'' yes , it was in your house ,' she said , ' and here is the finger and the ring , and you are the man who hacked it off .
' so they laid hands on him , and put him to death , and burnt both his body and his house in the wood .
