up at a place in vaage , in gudbrandsdale , there lived once on a time in the days of old a poor couple .
they had many children , and two of the sons who were about half grown up had to be always roaming about the country begging .
so it was that they were well known with all the highways and by - ways , and they also knew the short cut into hedale . it happened once that they wanted to get thither , but at the same time they heard that some falconers had built themselves a hut at mæla , and so they wished to kill two birds with one stone , and see the birds , and how they are taken , and so they took the cut across longmoss .
but you must know it was far on towards autumn , and so the milkmaids had all gone home from the shielings , and they could neither get shelter nor food .
then they had to keep straight on for hedale , but the path was a mere track , and when night fell they lost it ; and , worse still , they could not find the falconers ' hut either , and before they knew where they were , they found themselves in the very depths of the forest .
as soon as they saw they could not get on , they began to break boughs , lit a fire , and built themselves a bower of branches , for they had a hand - axe with them ; and , after that , they plucked heather and moss and made themselves a bed .
so a little while after they had lain down , they heard something which sniffed and snuffed so with its nose ; then the boys pricked up their ears and listened sharp to hear whether it were wild beasts or wood trolls , and just then something snuffed up the air louder than ever , and said --' there ' s a smell of christian blood here !
' at the same time they heard such a heavy foot - fall that the earth shook under it , and then they knew well enough the trolls must be about .
' heaven help us !
what shall we do ?'
said the younger boy to his brother .' oh !
you must stand as you are under the fir , and be ready to take our bags and run away when you see them coming ; as for me , i will take the hand - axe ,' said the other . all at once they saw the trolls coming at them like mad , and they were so tall and stout , their heads were just as high as the fir - tops ; but it was a good thing they had only one eye between them all three , and that they used turn and turn about .
they had a hole in their foreheads into which they put it , and turned and twisted it with their hands .
the one that went first , he must have it to see his way , and the others went behind and took hold of the first .
' take up the traps ,' said the elder of the boys , ' but don ' t run away too far , but see how things go ; as they carry their eye so high aloft they ' ll find it hard to see me when i get behind them .' yes !
the brother ran before and the trolls after him , meanwhile the elder got behind them and chopped the hindmost troll with his axe on the ankle , so that the troll gave an awful shriek , and the foremost troll got so afraid he was all of a shake and dropped the eye .
but the boy was not slow to snap it up .
it was bigger than two quart pots put together , and so clear and bright , that though it was pitch dark , everything was as clear as day as soon as he looked through it . when the trolls saw he had taken their eye and done one of them harm , they began to threaten him with all the evil in the world if he didn ' t give back the eye at once .
' i don ' t care a farthing for trolls and threats ,' said the boy , ' now i ' ve got three eyes to myself and you three have got none , and besides two of you have to carry the third .
' if we don ' t get our eye back this minute , you shall be both turned to stocks and stones ,' screeched the trolls . but the boy thought things needn ' t go so fast ; he was not afraid for witchcraft or hard words .
if they didn ' t leave him in peace he ' d chop them all three , so that they would have to creep and crawl along the earth like cripples and crabs . when the trolls heard that , they got still more afraid and began to use soft words .
they begged so prettily that he would give them their eye back , and then he should have both gold and silver and all that he wished to ask .
yes !
that seemed all very fine to the lad , but he must have the gold and silver first , and so he said , if one of them would go home and fetch as much gold and silver as would fill his and his brother ' s bags , and give them two good cross - bows beside , they might have their eye , but he should keep it until they did what he said . the trolls were very put out , and said none of them could go when he hadn ' t his eye to see with , but all at once one of them began to bawl out for their goody , for you must know they had a goody between them all three as well as an eye .
after a while an answer came from a knoll a long way off to the north .
so the trolls said she must come with two steel cross - bows and two buckets full of gold and silver , and then it was not long , you may fancy , before she was there .
and when she heard what had happened , she too began to threaten them with witchcraft .
but the trolls got so afraid , and begged her beware of the little wasp , for she couldn ' t be sure he would not take away her eye too .
so she threw them the cross - bows and the buckets and the gold and the silver , and strode off to the knoll with the trolls ; and since that time no one has ever heard that the trolls have walked in hedale wood snuffing after christian blood .
