once on a time there was a man who had a goody who was so cross - grained that there was no living with her .
as for her husband he could not get on with her at all , for whatever he wished she set her face right against it . so it fell one sunday in summer that the man and his wife went out into the field to see how the crop looked ; and when they came to a field of rye on the other side of the river , the man said --' ay !
now it is ripe .
to - morrow we must set to work and reap it .
'' yes ,' said his wife , ' to - morrow we can set to work and shear it .
'' what do you say ,' said the man ; ' shall we shear it ?
mayn ' t we just as well reap it ?
'' no ,' said the goody , ' it shall be shorn .
'' there is nothing so bad as a little knowledge ,' said the man , ' but you must have lost the little wit you had .
when did you ever hear of shearing a field ?
'' i know little , and i care to know little , i dare say ,' said the goody , ' but i know very well that this field shall be shorn and not reaped .
' that was what she said , and there was no help for it ; it must and should be shorn . so they walked about and quarrelled and strove till they came to the bridge across the river , just above a deep hole .
'' tis an old saying ,' said the man , ' that good tools make good work , but i fancy it will be a fine swathe that is shorn with a pair of shears .
mayn ' t we just as well reap the field after all ?'
he asked .' no !
no !
shear , shear ,' bawled out the goody , who jumped about and clipped like a pair of scissors under her husband ' s nose .
in her shrewishness she took such little heed that she tripped over a beam on the bridge , and down she went plump into the stream .
'' tis hard to wean any one from bad ways ,' said the man , ' but it were strange if i were not sometimes in the right , i too .
' then he swam out into the hole and caught his wife by the hair of her head , and so got her head above water .
' shall we reap the field now ?'
were the first words he said .' shear !
shear !
shear !'
screeched the goody .
' i ' ll teach you to shear ,' said the man , as he ducked her under the water ; but it was no good , they must shear it , she said , as soon as ever she came up again .
' i can ' t think anything else than that the goody is mad ,' said the man to himself .
' many are mad and never know it ; many have wit and never show it ; but all the same , i ' ll try her once more .
' but as soon as ever he ducked her under the water again , she held her hands up out of the water and began to clip with her fingers like a pair of shears .
then the man fell into a great rage and ducked her down both well and long ; but while he was about it , the goody ' s head fell down below the water , and she got so heavy all at once , that he had to let her go .' no !
no !'
he said , ' you wish to drag me down with you into the hole , but you may lie there by yourself .
' so the goody was left in the river . but after a while the man thought it was ill she should lie there and not get christian burial , and so he went down the course of the stream and hunted and searched for her , but for all his pains he could not find her .
then he came with all his men and brought his neighbours with him , and they all in a body began to drag the stream and to search for her all along it .
but for all their searching they found no goody .' oh !'
said the man , ' i have it .
all this is no good , we search in the wrong place .
this goody was a sort by herself ; there was not such another in the world while she was alive .
she was so cross and contrary , and i ' ll be bound it is just the same now she is dead .
we had better just go and hunt for her up stream , and drag for her above the force , maybe she has floated up thither .
' and so it was .
they went up stream and sought for her above the force , and there lay the goody , sure enough !
yes !
she was well called goody gainst - the - stream .
