once on a time there was a king , and that king had heard talk of a ship that went as fast by land as it did by water ; so he set his heart on having such a ship , and he gave his word that the man who could build it should have the princess and half the kingdom .
and this promise he had given out in every parish church in the realm , and at every parish meeting .
there were many that tried their hands you may fancy , for it was a nice thing to have half the kingdom , and it was brave to get the princess into the bargain , but it went ill with most of them . so there were three brothers away in the wood ; the eldest was called peter , the second paul , and the youngest osborn boots , because he was for ever sitting and grubbing in the ashes .
but it so happened that on the sunday , when the king ' s promise was given out , he was at church too .
so when he got home and told the story , his eldest brother , peter , begged his mother for some food , for he was bent on setting off , and trying his luck , if he couldn ' t build the ship and win the princess and half the realm .
so when he had got his wallet full he strode off from the farm , and on the way he met an old , old man , who was so bent and wretched .
' whither away ?'
asked the old man .' oh !'
said peter , ' i ' m off to the wood to make a platter for my father , for he doesn ' t like to eat out of the same dish with us .
'' a platter it shall be ,' said the man ; ' but what have you in your knapsack ?
'' muck ,' said peter .
' muck it shall be ,' said the man , and they parted . so peter strode on till he came to a grove of oaks , and then he fell to chopping and carpentering , but for all his hewing and all his carpentering he could turn out nothing but platter after platter .
so when it got towards mid - day , he was going to take a snack , and opened his wallet .
but there was not a morsel of food in it , and as he had nothing to eat , and did not get on any better with the carpentering , he got weary of the work , and took his axe and wallet on his back and strode off home to his mother again . next paul was for setting off to try if he had any luck in shipbuilding , and could win the king ' s daughter and half the kingdom .
he , too , begged his mother for food , and when he had got it he threw his wallet over his shoulder and set off from their farm .
on the way he met an old man who was so bent and wretched .
' whither away ?'
said the man .' oh !
i ' m just going to the wood to make a pig trough for our little pig ,' said paul .
' a pig trough it shall be ,' said the man .
' what have you got in your wallet ?'
asked the man .
' muck ,' said paul .
' muck it shall be ,' said the man .
' so paul trudged off to the wood , and fell to hewing and carpentering as hard as he could ; but however he hewed and however he carpentered , he could turn out nothing but pig troughs and pig tubs .
still he wouldn ' t give in , but worked till far on in the afternoon before he thought of taking a little snack ; then he got so hungry all at once that he must take out his knapsack , but when he opened it there was not a morsel of food in it .
then paul got so cross that he rolled up the knapsack and dashed it against a stump , and then he shouldered his axe and trudged away home from the wood as fast as he could . so when paul had come home , boots was all for setting out in his turn , and begged his mother for food .
' may be i might be man enough to get the ship built and win the princess and half the kingdom .'
that was what he said .' yes !
yes !
a likely thing ,' said his mother .
' you look like winning the princess and the kingdom , that you do , by my troth ; you , who have done naught else than grub and poke about in the ashes !
no !
no !
you don ' t get any food ,' said the goody .
' but boots would not give in ; he begged so long that at last he got leave .
as for food he got none , was it likely ?
but he got by stealth two oat cakes and a drop of stale beer , and with them he trudged off from the farm . well !
when he had walked a while he met the same old man , who was so bent and vile and wretched .
' whither away ?'
asked the man . oh !
i ' m going into the wood to build me a ship which will go as well on land as on sea ; for you must know that the king has given out that the man who can build such a ship shall have the princess and half the realm .
'' what have you got in your wallet ?'
asked the man .
' not much to brag of ,' said boots , ' though it ' s called travelling fare .
'' if you ' ll give me some of your food , i ' ll help you ,' said the man .
' with all my heart ,' said boots ; ' but there ' s nothing but two oat cakes and a drop of stale beer .
'' it was all the same to him what it was ,' said the man , so that he got something ; and he would be sure to help him . so when they got up to the old oak in the wood , the man said to the lad ,--' now you must chop out one chip , and you must put it back where it came from , and when you have done that you may lie down and sleep . yes !
boots did as he said , he lay him down to sleep , and in his slumber he thought he heard some one hewing and hammering , and carpentering and sawing , and planing , but he could not wake up till the man called him , and then there stood the ship all ready , alongside the oak .
' now you must go aboard her , and every one you meet you must take as one of your crew ,' he said . yes !
boots thanked him for the ship , and sailed off saying he ' d be sure to do what he said . so when he had sailed a while , he came upon a great , long , thin fellow , who lay away by the hillside and ate granite .
' what kind of chap are you ?'
said boots , ' that you lie here eating granite ?' well !
he was so sharp set for meat he could never have his fill , and that was why he was forced to eat granite .
that was what he said ; and then he begged if he might have leave to be one of the ship ' s company .
' oh , yes ,' said boots , ' if you care to come , step on board .
' yes , he was willing enough , and he took with him a few big granite boulders as his sea stores . so when they had sailed a bit farther they met a man who lay on a sunny brae and sucked at a tap .
' what sort of a chap are you ?'
asked boots , and what good is it that you lie there sucking at that tap ?'' oh !'
said he , ' when one hasn ' t got the cask , one must be thankful for the tap .
i am always so thirsty for ale , that i can never drink enough ale or wine ;' and then he asked if he might have leave to be one of the ship ' s company .
' if you care to come , step on board ,' said boots . yes , he was willing enough , and he stepped on board and took the tap with him lest he should be a - thirst . so when they had sailed a bit farther they met one who lay with one ear on the ground , listening .
' what sort of a chap are you ?'
asked boots ' and what good is it that you lie there on the ground , listening ?
'' i am listening to the grass growing ,' he said , ' for i am so quick of hearing that i can hear it grow ;' and so he begged that he might be one of the ship ' s company .
well , he too did not get ' nay .
'' if you care to come , step on board ,' said boots . yes , he was willing enough , and so up he too stepped into the ship . so when they had sailed a bit farther , they came to a man who stood aiming and aiming .
' what sort of a chap are you ?'
said boots , ' and why is it that you stand there aiming and aiming ?
'' i am so sharp - sighted ,' he said , ' that i ' m a dead shot up to the world ' s end ;' and so he too asked if he might have leave to be one of the ship ' s company .
' if you care to come , step in ,' said boots . yes , he was willing enough , and so he stepped up into the ship and joined boots and his comrades . so when they had sailed a bit farther , they came on a man who went about hopping on one leg , and on the other he had seven hundred weight . what sort of a chap are you ?'
asked boots ; ' and what ' s the good of your limping and hopping on one leg , with seven hundred weight on the other ?'' oh ?'
said he , ' i ' m as light as a feather , and if i went on both legs i should be at the world ' s end in less than five minutes ;' and so he too begged if he might have leave to be one of the ship ' s company .
' if you care to come , step in ,' said boots . yes , he was willing enough , and he stepped on board to boots and his comrades .
' so when they had sailed a bit farther , they met a man who stood holding his throat .
' what sort of a chap are you ?'
asked boots , ' and why in the world do you stand here holding your throat ?'' oh !'
said he , ' you must know i have got seven summers and fifteen winters inside me , so i ' ve good need to hold my gullet , for if they all slipped out at once they ' d freeze the whole world in a trice .'
that was what he said , and so he begged leave to be with them .
' if you care to come , step in ,' said boots .
yes , he was willing enough , and so he too stepped on board the ship to the rest . so when they had sailed a good bit farther , they came to the king ' s grange .
then boots strode straight into the king , and said , that the ship was ready out in the courtyard , and now he was come to claim the princess , as the king had given his word . but the king wouldn ' t hear of it , for boots did not look very nice ; he was grimy and sooty , and the king was loath to give his daughter to such a fellow .
so he said he must wait a little , he couldn ' t have the princess until they cleared a barn which the king had with three hundred casks of salt meat in it .
' all the same ,' said the king , ' if you can do it by this time to - morrow you shall have her .
'' i can but try ,' said boots ; ' i may have leave , perhaps , to take one of my crew with me ?
'' yes , he might have leave to do that , even if he took them all six ,' said the king , for he thought it quite beyond his power though he had six hundred to help him . but boots only took with him the man who ate granite , and was always so sharp set ; and so when they came next morning and unlocked the barn , if he hadn ' t eaten all the casks , so that there was nothing left but half a dozen spare - ribs , and that was only one for each of his other comrades .
so boots strode into the king , and said , now the barn was empty , and now he might have the princess . then the king went out to the barn , and empty it was , that was plain enough ; but still boots was so sooty and smutty , that the king thought it a shame that such a fellow should have his daughter .
so he said he had a cellar full of ale and old wine , three hundred casks of each kind , which he must have drunk out first , and said the king ,--' all the same , if you are man enough to drink them out by this time to - morrow , you shall have her .
'' i can but try ,' said boots ; ' but i may have leave perhaps , to take one of my comrades with me .
'' with all my heart ,' said the king , who thought he had so much ale and wine that the whole seven of them would soon get more than their skins could hold . but boots only took with him the man who sucked the tap , and who had such a swallow for ale , and then the king locked them both up in the cellar . so he drank cask after cask as long as there were any left , but at last he spared a drop or two , about as much as a quart or two , for each of his comrades .
next morning they unlocked the cellar , and boots strode off at once to the king , and said he was done with the ale and wine , and now he must have his daughter as he had given his word .
' ay , ay , but i must first go down into the cellar and see ,' said the king , for he didn ' t believe it .
but when he got to the cellar , there was nothing in it but empty casks .
but boots was still black and smutty , and the king thought he never could bear to have such a fellow for his son - in - law .
so he said , ' no ,' but all the same if he could fetch him water from the world ' s end , in ten minutes , for the princess ' s tea , he should have both her and half the realm , for he thought that quite out of his power .
' i can but try ,' said boots ; so he laid hand on him who limped on one leg , with seven hundred weight on the other , and said he must unbuckle the weights and use both his legs as fast as ever he could , for he must have water from the world ' s end for the princess ' s tea in ten minutes . so he took off the weights , and got a pail , and set off and was out of sight in a trice .
but time went on and on , for seven lengths and seven breadths , and yet he did not come back .
at last there were no more than three minutes left till the time was up , and the king was as pleased as though some one had given him a horse .
but just then boots bawled out to him who heard the grass grow , and bade him listen and hear what had become of him .
' he has fallen asleep at the well ,' he said .
' i can hear him snoring , and the trolls are combing his hair .
' so boots called him , who could shoot to the world ' s end , and bade him put a bullet into the troll .
yes !
he did that , and shot him right in the eye , and the troll set up such a howl that he woke up at once , he that was to fetch the water for tea ; and when he got back to the king ' s grange , there was still one minute left of the ten . then boots strode into the king , and said there was the water , and now he must have the princess , there must be no more words about it .
but the king thought him just as sooty and smutty as before , and did not at all like to have him for a son - in - law .
so the king said he had three hundred fathoms of wood , with which he was about to dry corn in the malt - house , and ' all the same , if you are man enough to get inside it while i burn up all that fuel , you shall have her , and i will make no more bones about it .
'' i can but try ,' said boots ; ' but i must have leave to take one of my crew with me .
'' yes , yes !'
said the king , ' all six of them if you like ;' for he thought it would be warm enough in there for all of them . but boots took with him the man who had fifteen winters and seven summers inside him , and they trudged off to the malt - house at night .
but the king had laid the fuel on thick , and there was such a pile burning , it almost melted the stove .
out again they could not come , for they had scarce set foot inside than the king shot the bolt behind them , and hung two padlocks on the door besides .
then boots said ,--' you ' d better slip out six or seven winters at once , so that it may be a nice summer heat .
' then the heat fell , and they could bear it , but on in the night it began to grow chilly ; so boots said he must make it milder , with two summers , and then they slept till far on next day . but when they heard the king rattling at the door outside , boots said ,--' now you must let slip two more winters , but lay them so that the last may go full on his face .
' yes , he did so , and when the king unlocked the malt - house door , and thought to find them lying there burnt to cinders , there they sat shivering and shaking till their teeth chattered , and the man with the fifteen winters let slip the last right into the king ' s face , so that it swelled up at once into a big frost - bite .
' may i have your daughter now ?'
said boots .
' yes , yes !
pray take her and keep her , and half the realm besides ,' said the king , for he couldn ' t say ' no ' any longer . so they held the bridal feast , and kept it up and rejoiced and fired off witch shots , and meanwhile they went looking about for charges , and then they took me and gave me porridge in a flask , and milk in a basket , and then they shot me off here to you , that i might tell you all how the wedding went off ."
