once on a time there was a goody who had seven hungry bairns , and she was frying a pancake for them .
it was a sweet - milk pancake , and there it lay in the pan bubbling and frizzling so thick and good , it was a sight for sore eyes to look at .
and the bairns stood round about , and the goodman sat by and looked on .
' oh , give me a bit of pancake , mother , dear ; i am so hungry ,' said one bairn .
' oh , darling mother ,' said the second .
' oh , darling , good mother ,' said the third .
' oh , darling , good , nice mother ,' said the fourth .
' oh , darling , pretty , good , nice mother ,' said the fifth .
' oh , darling , pretty , good , nice , clever mother ,' said the sixth .
' oh , darling , pretty , good , nice , clever , sweet mother ,' said the seventh . so they begged for the pancake all round , the one more prettily than the other ; for they were so hungry and so good .
' yes , yes , bairns , only bide a bit till it turns itself ,'-- she ought to have said ' till i can get it turned ,'--' and then you shall all have some -- a lovely sweet - milk pancake ; only look how fat and happy it lies there .
' when the pancake heard that , it got afraid , and in a trice it turned itself all of itself , and tried to jump out of the pan ; but it fell back into it again t ' other side up , and so when it had been fried a little on the other side too , till it got firmer in its flesh , it sprang out on the floor , and rolled off like a wheel through the door and down the hill .' holloa !
stop , pancake !'
and away went the goody after it , with the frying - pan in one hand , and the ladle in the other , as fast as she could , and her bairns behind her , while the goodman limped after them last of all .' hi !
won ' t you stop ?
seize it .
stop , pancake , they all screamed out , one after the other , and tried to catch it on the run and hold it ; but the pancake rolled on and on , and in the twinkling of an eye it was so far ahead that they couldn ' t see it , for the pancake was faster on its feet than any of them . so when it had rolled awhile it met a man .
' good - day , pancake ,' said the man .
' god bless you , manny panny !'
said the pancake .
' dear pancake ,' said the man , ' don ' t roll so fast ; stop a little and let me eat you .
'' when i have given the slip to goody poody , and the goodman , and seven squalling children , i may well slip through your fingers , manny panny ,' said the pancake , and rolled on and on till it met a hen .
' good - day , pancake ,' said the hen .
' the same to you , henny penny ,' said the pancake .
' pancake , dear , don ' t roll so fast , bide a bit and let me eat you up ,' said the hen .
' when i have given the slip to goody poody , and the goodman , and seven squalling children , and manny panny , i may well slip through your claws , henny penny ,' said the pancake , and so it rolled on like a wheel down the road . just then it met a cock .
' good - day , pancake ,' said the cock .
' the same to you , cocky locky ,' said the pancake .
' pancake , dear , don ' t roll so fast , but bide a bit and let me eat you up .
'' when i have given the slip to goody poody , and the goodman , and seven squalling children , and to manny panny , and henny penny , i may well slip through your claws , cocky locky ,' said the pancake , and off it set rolling away as fast as it could ; and when it had rolled a long way it met a duck .
' good - day , pancake ,' said the duck .
' the same to you , ducky lucky .
'' pancake , dear , don ' t roll away so fast ; bide a bit and let me eat you up .
'' when i have given the slip to goody poody , and the goodman , and seven squalling children , and manny panny , and henny penny , and cocky locky , i may well slip through your fingers , ducky lucky ,' said the pancake , and with that it took to rolling and rolling faster than ever ; and when it had rolled a long , long while , it met a goose .
' good - day , pancake ,' said the goose .
' the same to you , goosey poosey .
'' pancake , dear , don ' t roll so fast ; bide a bit and let me eat you up .
'' when i have given the slip to goody poody , and the goodman , and seven squalling children , and manny panny , and henny penny , and cocky locky , and ducky lucky , i can well slip through your feet , goosey poosey ,' said the pancake , and off it rolled . so when it had rolled a long , long way farther , it met a gander .
' good - day , pancake ,' said the gander .
' the same to you , gander pander ,' said the pancake .
' pancake , dear , don ' t roll so fast : bide a bit and let me eat you up .
'' when i have given the slip to goody poody , and the goodman , and seven squalling children , and manny panny , and henny penny , and cocky locky , and ducky lucky , and goosey poosey , i may well slip through your feet , gander pander ,' said the pancake , which rolled off as fast as ever . so when it had rolled a long , long time , it met a pig .
' good - day , pancake ,' said the pig .
' the same to you , piggy wiggy ,' said the pancake , which , without a word more , began to roll and roll like mad .
' nay , nay ,' said the pig , ' you needn ' t be in such a hurry ; we two can then go side by side and see one another over the wood ; they say it is not too safe in there .
' the pancake thought there might be something in that , and so they kept company .
but when they had gone awhile , they came to a brook .
as for piggy , he was so fat he swam safe across , it was nothing to him ; but the poor pancake couldn ' t get over .
' seat yourself on my snout ,' said the pig , ' and i ' ll carry you over .
' so the pancake did that .
' ouf , ouf ,' said the pig , and swallowed the pancake at one gulp ; and then , as the poor pancake could go no farther , why -- this story can go no farther either .
