once on a time there were three brothers , who had lost their parents ; and as they had left nothing behind them on which the lads could live , they had to go out into the world to try their luck .
the two elder fitted themselves out as well as they could ; but the youngest , whom they called taper tom , because he always sat in the chimney - corner and held tapers of pine wood , him they would not have with them . the two set out early in the grey dawn ; but , however fast they went , or did not go , taper tom came just as soon as the others to the king ' s palace .
so when they got there , they asked for work .
the king said he had nothing for them to do ; but as they were so pressing , he ' d see if he could not find them something ,-- there must be always something to do in such a big house .
yes !
they might drive nails into the wall ; and when they had done driving them in , they might pull them out again .
when they had done that , they might carry wood and water into the kitchen . taper tom was the handiest in driving nails into the wall and in pulling them out again and he was the handiest also in carrying wood and water .
so his brothers were jealous of him , and said he had given out that he was good enough to get the king the prettiest princess who was to be found in twelve kingdoms ; for you must know the king had lost his old dame , and was a widower .
when the king heard that , he told taper tom he must do what he had said , or else he would make them lay him on the block and chop his head off . taper tom answered , he had never said nor thought anything of the kind ; but , as the king was so stern , he would try what he could do .
so he got him a scrip of food over his shoulders , and set off from the palace ; but he had not gone far on the road before he grew hungry , and wanted to taste the food they had given him when he set out .
so when he had seated himself to rest at his ease , under a spruce by the roadside , up came an old hag hobbling , who asked what he had in his scrip .
' salt meat and fresh meat ,' said the lad .
' if you are hungry , granny , come and take a snack with me .' yes !
she thanked him , and then she said , might be she would do him a good turn herself ; and away she hobbled through the wood .
so when taper tom had eaten his full , and had rested , he threw his scrip over his shoulder and set off again ; but he had not gone far before he found a pipe .
that , he thought , would be nice to have with him and play on by the way ; and it was not long before he brought the sound out of it , you may fancy .
but then there came about him such a swarm of little trolls , and each asked the other in full cry ,--' what has my lord to order ?
what has my lord to order ?
' taper tom said he never knew he was lord over them ; but if he was to order anything , he wished they would fetch him the prettiest princess to be found in twelve kingdoms .
yes !
that was no great thing , the little trolls thought ; they knew well enough where she was , and they could show him the way , and then he might go and get her for himself , for they had no power to touch her . then they showed him the way , and he got to the end of his journey well and happily .
there was not anyone who laid so much as two sticks across in his way .
it was a troll ' s castle , and in it sat three lovely princesses ; but as soon as ever taper tom came in , they all lost their wits for fear , and ran about like scared lambs , and all at once they were turned into three lemons that lay in the window .
taper tom was so sorry and unhappy at that , he scarce knew which way to turn .
but when he had thought a little , he took and put the lemons into his pocket , for he thought they would be good to have if he got thirsty by the way , for he had heard say lemons were sour . so when he had gone a bit of the way , he got so hot and thirsty ; water was not to be had , and he did not know what he should do to quench his thirst .
so he fell to thinking of the lemons , and took one of them out and bit a hole in it .
but , lo !
inside sat the princess as far as her armpits , and screamed out --' water !-- water !'
unless she got water , she must die , she said . yes !
the lad ran about looking for water as though he were a mad thing ; but there was no water to be got , and all at once the princess was dead . so when he had gone a bit further , he got still hotter and thirstier ; and as he could find nothing to quench his thirst , he pulled out the second lemon and bit a hole in it .
inside it was also a princess , sitting as far as her armpits , and she was still lovelier than the first .
she , too , screamed for water , and said , if she could not get it she must die outright .
so taper tom hunted under stone and moss , but he could find no water ; and so the end was the second princess died too . taper tom thought things got worse and worse , and so it was , for the farther he went the hotter it got .
the earth was so dry and burnt up , there was not a drop of water to be found , and he was not far off being half dead of thirst .
he kept himself as long as he could from biting a hole in the lemon he still had , but at last there was no help for it .
so when he had bitten the hole , there sat a princess inside it also ; she was the loveliest in twelve kingdoms , and she screamed out if she could not get water she must die at once .
so taper tom ran about hunting for water ; and this time he fell upon the king ' s miller , and he showed him the way to the mill - dam .
so when he came to the dam with her and gave her some water , she came quite out of the lemon , and was stark naked .
so taper tom had to let her have the wrap he had to throw over her , and then she hid herself up a tree while he went up to the king ' s palace to fetch her clothes , and tell the king how he had got her , and , in a word , told him the whole story . but while this was going on , the cook came down to the mill - dam to fetch water ; and when she saw the lovely face which played on the water , she thought it was her own , and grew so glad she fell a - dancing and jumping because she had grown so pretty .
' the deil carry water ,' she cried , ' since i am so pretty ;' and away she threw the water - buckets .
but in a little while she got to see that the face in the mill - dam belonged to the princess who sat up in the tree ; and then she got so cross , that she tore her down from the tree , and threw her out into the dam .
but she herself put on taper tom ' s cloak , and crept up into the tree . so when the king came and set eyes on the ugly swarthy kitchen - maid , he turned white and red ; but when he heard how they said she was the loveliest in twelve kingdoms , he thought he could not help believing there must be something in it ; and besides he felt for poor taper tom , who had taken so much pains to get her for him .
' she ' ll get better , perhaps , as time goes on ,' he thought , ' when she is dressed smartly , and wears fine clothes ;' and so he took her home with him . then they sent for all the wig - makers and needlewomen , and she was dressed and clad like a princess ; but for all they washed and dressed her , she was still as ugly and black as ever . after a while the kitchen - maid was to go to the dam to fetch water , and then she caught a great silver fish in her bucket .
she bore it up to the palace , and showed it to the king , and he thought it grand and fine ; but the ugly princess said it was some witchcraft , and they must burn it , for she soon saw what it was .
well !
the fish was burnt , and next morning they found a lump of silver in the ashes .
so the cook came and told it to the king , and he thought it passing strange ; but the princess said it was all witchcraft , and bade them bury it in the dung - heap .
the king was much against it ; but she left him neither rest nor peace , and so he said at last they might do it . but lo !
next day stood a tall lovely linden tree on the spot where they had buried the lump of silver , and that linden had leaves which gleamed like silver .
so when they told the king that , he thought it passing strange ; but the princess said it was nothing but witchcraft , and they must cut down the linden at once .
the king was against that ; but the princess plagued him so long that at last he had to give way to her in this also . but lo !
when the lasses went out to gather the chips of the linden to light the fires , they were pure silver .
' it isn ' t worth while ,' one of them said , ' to say anything about this to the king or the princess , or else they , too , will be burnt and melted .
it is better to hide them in our drawers .
they will be good to have when a lover comes , and we are going to marry .' yes !
they were all of one mind as to that ; but when they had borne the chips a while , they grew so fearfully heavy that they could not help looking to see what it was ; and then they found the chips had been changed into a child , and it was not long before it grew into the loveliest princess you ever set eyes on . the lasses could see very well that something wrong lay under all this .
so they got her clothes , and flew off to find the lad , who was to fetch the loveliest princess in twelve kingdoms , and told him their story . so when taper tom came , the princess told him her story , and how the cook had come and torn her from the tree and thrown her into the dam ; and how she had been the silver fish , and the silver lump , and the linden , and the chips , and how she was the true princess . it was not so easy to get the king ' s ear , for the ugly black cook hung over him early and late ; but at last they made out a story , and said that a challenge had come from a neighbour king , and so they got him out ; and when he came to see the lovely princess , he was so taken with her , he was for holding the bridal feast on the spot ; and when he heard how badly the ugly black cook had behaved to her , he said they should take her and roll her down hill in a cask full of nails .
then they kept the bridal feast at such a rate that it was heard and talked of over twelve kingdoms .
