once on a time there were two young men who were such great friends that they swore to one another they would never part , either in life or death .
one of them died before he was at all old , and a little while after the other wooed a farmer ' s daughter , and was to be married to her .
so when they were bidding guests to the wedding the bridegroom went himself to the churchyard where his friend lay , and knocked at his grave , and called him by name .
no !
he neither answered nor came .
he knocked again , and he called again , but no one came .
a third time he knocked louder and called louder to him , to come that he might talk to him .
so , after a long , long time , he heard a rustling , and at last the dead man came up out of the grave .
' it was well you came at last ,' said the bridegroom , ' for i have been standing here ever so long , knocking and calling for you .
'' i was a long way off ,' said the dead man , ' so that i did not quite hear you till the last time you called .
'' all right ,' said the bridegroom ; ' but i am going to stand bridegroom to - day , and you mind well , i dare say , what we used to talk about , and how we were to stand by each other at our weddings as best man .
'' i mind it well ,' said the dead man , ' but you must wait a bit till i have made myself a little smart ; and , after all , no one can say i have on a wedding garment .
' the lad was hard put to it for time , for he was overdue at home to meet the guests , and it was all but time to go to church ; but still he had to wait awhile and let the dead man go into a room by himself , as he begged , so that he might brush himself up a bit , and come smart to church like the rest , for , of course , he was to go with the bridal train to church . yes !
the dead man went with him both to church and from church , but when they had got so far on with the wedding that they had taken off the bride ' s crown , he said he must go .
so , for old friendship ' s sake , the bridegroom said he would go with him to the grave again .
and as they walked to the churchyard the bridegroom asked his friend if he had seen much that was wonderful , or heard anything that was pleasant to know .' yes !
that i have ,' said the dead man .
' i have seen much , and heard many strange things .
'' that must be fine to see ,' said the bridegroom .
' do you know i have a mind to go along with you , and see all that with my own eyes .
'' you are quite welcome ,' said the dead man ; ' but it may chance that you may be away some time .
'' so it might ,' said the bridegroom ; but for all that he would go down into the grave . but before they went down the dead man took and cut up a turf out of the graveyard and put it on the young man ' s head .
down and down they went , far and far away , through dark , silent wastes , across wood , and moor , and bog , till they came to a great , heavy gate , which opened to them as soon as the dead man touched it .
inside it began to grow lighter , first as though it were moonshine , and the further they went the lighter it got .
at last they got to a spot where there were such green hills , knee - deep in grass , and on them fed a large herd of kine , who grazed as they went ; but for all they ate those kine looked poor , and thin , and wretched .
' what ' s all this ?'
said the lad who had been bridegroom ; ' why are they so thin , and in such bad case , though they eat , every one of them , as though they were well paid to eat ?
'' this is a likeness of those who never can have enough , though they rake and scrape it together ever so much ,' said the dead man . so they journeyed on far and farther than far , till they came to some hill pastures , where there was naught but bare rocks and stones , with here and there a blade of grass .
here was grazing another herd of kine , which were so sleek , and fat , and smooth that their coats shone again .
' what are these ,' asked the bridegroom , ' who have so little to live on , and yet are in such good plight ?
i wonder what they can be .
'' this ,' said the dead man , ' is a likeness of those who are content with the little they have , however poor it be .
' so they went farther and farther on till they came to a great lake , and it and all about it was so bright and shining that the bridegroom could scarce bear to look at it -- it was so dazzling .
' now , you must sit down here ,' said the dead man , ' till i come back .
i shall be away a little while .
' with that he set off , and the bridegroom sat down , and as he sat sleep fell on him , and he forgot everything in sweet deep slumber .
after a while the dead man came back .
' it was good of you to sit still here , so that i could find you again .
' but when the bridegroom tried to get up he was all overgrown with moss and bushes , so that he found himself sitting in a thicket of thorns and brambles . so when he had made his way out of it they journeyed back again , and the dead man led him by the same way to the brink of the grave .
there they parted and said farewell , and as soon as the bridegroom got out of the grave he went straight home to the house where the wedding was . but when he got where he thought the house stood , he could not find his way .
then he looked about on all sides , and asked every one he met , but he could neither hear nor learn anything of the bride , or the wedding , or his kindred , or his father and mother ; nay , he could not so much as find any one whom he knew .
and all he met wondered at the strange shape , who went about and looked for all the world like a scarecrow . well !
as he could find no one he knew , he made his way to the priest , and told him of his kinsmen and all that had happened up to the time he stood bridegroom , and how he had gone away in the midst of his wedding .
but the priest knew nothing at all about it at first ; but when he had hunted in his old registers he found out that the marriage he spoke of had happened a long , long time ago , and that all the folk he talked of had lived four hundred years before . in that time there had grown up a great stout oak in the priest ' s yard , and when he saw it he clambered up into it , that he might look about him .
but the grey - beard who had sat in heaven and slumbered for four hundred years , and had now at last come back , did not come down from the oak as well as he went up .
he was stiff and gouty , as was likely enough ; and so when he was coming down he made a false step , fell down , broke his neck , and that was the end of him .
