once on a time there was a priest , who was such a bully , that he bawled out , ever so far off , whenever he met anyone driving on the king ' s highway ,--' out of the way , out of the way !
here comes the priest !
' one day when he was driving along and behaving so , he met the king himself .
' out of the way , out of the way ,' he bawled a long way off .
but the king drove on and kept his own ; so that time it was the priest who had to turn his horse aside , and when the king came alongside him , he said , ' to - morrow you shall come to me to the palace , and if you can ' t answer three questions which i will set you , you shall lose hood and gown for your pride ' s sake .
' this was something else than the priest was wont to hear .
he could bawl and bully , shout , and behave worse than badly .
all that he could do , but question and answer was out of his power .
so he set off to the clerk who was said to be better in a gown than the priest himself , and told him he had no mind to go to the king .
' for one fool can ask more than ten wise men can answer ;' and the end was , he got the clerk to go in his stead . yes !
the clerk set off , and came to the palace in the priest ' s gown and hood .
there the king met him out in the porch with crown and sceptre , and was so grand it glittered and gleamed from him .' well !
are you there ?'
said the king . yes ; he was there , sure enough .
' tell me first ,' said the king ; ' how far the east is from the west ?
'' just a day ' s journey ,' said the clerk .
' how is that ?'
asked the king .
' don ' t you know ,' said the clerk , ' that the sun rises in the east and sets in the west , and he does it just nicely in one day .
'' very well !'
said the king ; ' but tell me now what you think i am worth , as you see me stand here ?
'' well ,' said the clerk ; ' our lord was valued at thirty pieces of silver , so i don ' t think i can set your price higher than twenty - nine .
'' all very fine !'
said the king ; ' but as you are so wise , perhaps you can tell me what i am thinking about now ?'' oh !'
said the clerk ; ' you are thinking it ' s the priest who stands before you , but so help me , if you don ' t think wrong , for i am the clerk .
'' be off home with you ,' said the king , ' and be you priest , and let him be clerk ,' and so it was .
