once on a time , there was a man who went into the wood to cut hop - poles , but he could find no trees so long and straight , and slender , as he wanted , till he came high up under a great heap of stones .
there he heard groans and moans as though some one were at death ' s door .
so he went up to see who it was that needed help , and then he heard that the noise came from under a great flat stone which lay upon the heap .
it was so heavy it would have taken many a man to lift it .
but the man went down again into the wood and cut down a tree , which he turned into a lever , and with that he tilted up the stone , and lo !
out from under it crawled a dragon , and made at the man to swallow him up .
but the man said he had saved the dragon ' s life , and it was shameful thanklessness in him to want to eat him up .
' may be ,' said the dragon ; ' but you might very well know i must be starved when i have been here hundreds of years and never tasted meat .
besides , it ' s the way of the world ,-- that ' s how it pays its debts .
' the man pleaded his cause stoutly , and begged prettily for his life ; and at last they agreed to take the first living thing that came for a daysman , and if his doom went the other way the man should not lose his life , but if he said the same as the dragon , the dragon should eat the man . the first thing that came was an old hound , who ran along the road down below under the hillside .
him they spoke to , and begged him to be judge .
' god knows ,' said the hound , ' i have served my master truly ever since i was a little whelp .
i have watched and watched many and many a night through , while he lay warm asleep on his ear , and i have saved house and home from fire and thieves more than once ; but now i can neither see nor hear any more , and he wants to shoot me .
and so i must run away , and slink from house to house , and beg for my living till i die of hunger .
no !
it ' s the way of the world ,' said the hound ; ' that ' s how it pays its debts .
'' now i am coming to eat you up ,' said the dragon , and tried to swallow the man again .
but the man begged and prayed hard for his life , till they agreed to take the next comer for a judge ; and if he said the same as the dragon and the hound , the dragon was to eat him , and get a meal of man ' s meat ; but if he did not say so , the man was to get off with his life . so there came an old horse limping down along the road which ran under the hill .
him they called out to come and settle the dispute .
yes ; he was quite ready to do that .
' now , i have served my master ,' said the horse , ' as long as i could draw or carry .
i have slaved and striven for him till the sweat trickled from every hair , and i have worked till i have grown lame , and halt , and worn out with toil and age ; now i am fit for nothing .
i am not worth my food , and so i am to have a bullet through me , he says .
nay !
nay !
it ' s the way of the world .
that ' s how the world pays its debts .
'' well , now i ' m coming to eat you ,' said the dragon , who gaped wide , and wanted to swallow the man .
but he begged again hard for his life . but the dragon said he must have a mouthful of man ' s meat ; he was so hungry , he couldn ' t bear it any longer .
' see , yonder comes one who looks as if he was sent to be a judge between us ,' said the man , as he pointed to reynard the fox , who came stealing between the stones of the heap .
' all good things are three ,' said the man ; ' let me ask him , too , and if he gives doom like the others , eat me up on the spot .
'' very well ,' said the dragon .
he , too , had heard that all good things were three , and so it should be a bargain .
so the man talked to the fox as he had talked to the others .
' yes , yes ,' said reynard ; ' i see how it all is ;' but as he said this he took the man a little on one side .
' what will you give me if i free you from the dragon ?'
he whispered into the man ' s ear .
' you shall be free to come to my house , and to be lord and master over my hens and geese , every thursday night ,' said the man .
' well , my dear dragon ,' said reynard , ' this is a very hard nut to crack .
i can ' t get it into my head how you , who are so big and mighty a beast , could find room to lie under yon stone .
'' can ' t you ,' said the dragon ; ' well , i lay under the hillside , and sunned myself , and down came a landslip , and hurled the stone over me .
'' all very likely , i dare say ,' said reynard ; ' but still i can ' t understand it , and what ' s more , i won ' t believe it till i see it .
' so the man said they had better prove it , and the dragon crawled down into the hole again ; but in the twinkling of an eye they whipped out the lever , and down the stone crashed again on the dragon .
' lie now there till doomsday ,' said the fox .
' you would eat the man , would you , who saved your life ?
' the dragon groaned , and moaned , and begged hard to come out ; but the two went their way , and left him alone . the very first thursday night reynard came to be lord and master over the hen - roost , and hid himself behind a great pile of wood hard by .
when the maid went to feed the fowls , in stole reynard .
she neither saw nor heard anything of him ; but her back was scarce turned before he had sucked blood enough for a week , and stuffed himself so that he couldn ' t stir .
so when she came again in the morning , there reynard lay and snored , and slept in the morning sun , with all four legs stretched straight ; and he was as sleek and round as a german sausage . away ran the lassie for the goody , and she came , and all the lassies with her , with sticks and brooms to beat reynard ; and , to tell the truth , they nearly banged the life out of him ; but , just as it was almost all over with him , and he thought his last hour was come , he found a hole in the floor , and so he crept out , and limped and hobbled off to the wood .
' oh , oh ,' said reynard ; ' how true it is .
' tis the way of the world ; and this is how it pays its debts .'
