once on a time there was a cock who stood on a dung - heap , and crew , and flapped his wings .
then the fox came by .
' good day ,' said reynard , ' i heard you crowing so nicely ; but can you stand on one leg and crow , and wink your eyes ?
'' oh , yes ,' said chanticleer .
' i can do that very well .'
so he stood on one leg and crew ; but he winked only with one eye , and when he had done that he made himself big and flapped his wings , as though he had done a great thing .
' very pretty , to be sure ,' said reynard .
' almost as pretty as when the parson preaches in church ; but can you stand on one leg and wink both your eyes at once ?
i hardly think you can .
'' can ' t i though !'
said chanticleer , and stood on one leg , and winked both his eyes , and crew .
but reynard caught hold of him , took him by the throat , and threw him over his back , so that he was off to the wood before he had crowed his crow out , as fast as reynard could lay legs to the ground . when they had come under an old spruce fir , reynard threw chanticleer on the ground , set his paw on his breast , and was going to take a bite !
' you are a heathen , reynard !'
said chanticleer .
' good christians say grace , and ask a blessing before they eat .
' but reynard would be no heathen .
god forbid it !
so he let go his hold , and was about to fold his paws over his breast and say grace -- but pop !
up flew chanticleer into a tree .
' you sha ' n ' t get off for all that ,' said reynard to himself .
so he went away , and came again with a few chips , which the woodcutters had left .
chanticleer peeped and peered to see what they could be .
' whatever have you got there ?'
he asked .
' these are letters i have just got ,' said reynard , ' won ' t you help me to read them , for i don ' t know how to read writing .
'' i ' d be so happy , but i dare not read them now ; said chanticleer ; ' for here comes a hunter , i see him , i see him , as i sit by the tree trunk .
' when reynard heard chanticleer chattering about a hunter , he took to his heels as quick as he could . this time it was reynard who was made game of .
