once on a time there was a poor woman who lived in a tumble - down hut far away in the wood .
little had she to eat , and nothing at all to burn , and so she sent a little boy she had out into the wood to gather fuel .
he ran and jumped , and jumped and ran , to keep himself warm , for it was a cold gray autumn day , and every time he found a bough or a root for his billet , he had to beat his arms across his breast , for his fists were as red as the cranberries over which he walked , for very cold .
so when he had got his billet of wood and was off home , he came upon a clearing of stumps on the hillside , and there he saw a white crooked stone .' ah !
you poor old stone ,' said the boy ; ' how white and wan you are !
i ' ll be bound you are frozen to death ;' and with that he took off his jacket , and laid it on the stone .
so when he got home with his billet of wood his mother asked what it all meant that he walked about in wintry weather in his shirtsleeves .
then he told her how he had seen an old crooked stone which was all white and wan for frost , and how he had given it his jacket .
' what a fool you are !'
said his mother ; ' do you think a stone can freeze ?
but even if it froze till it shook again , know this -- everyone is nearest to his own self .
it costs quite enough to get clothes to your back , without your going and hanging them on stones in the clearings ,' and as she said that , she hunted the boy out of the house to fetch his jacket . so when he came where the stone stood , lo !
it had turned itself and lifted itself up on one side from the ground .
' yes !
yes !
this is since you got the jacket , poor old thing ,' said the boy . but , when he looked a little closer at the stone , he saw a money - box , full of bright silver , under it .
' this is stolen money , no doubt ,' thought the boy ; ' no one puts money , come by honestly , under a stone away in the wood .
' so he took the money - box and bore it down to a tarn hard by and threw the whole hoard into the tarn ; but one silver pennypiece floated on the top of the water , "' ah !
ah !
that is honest ,' said the lad ; ' for what is honest never sinks .
' so he took the silver penny and went home with it and his jacket .
then he told his mother how it had all happened , how the stone had turned itself , and how he had found a money - box full of silver money , which he had thrown out into the tarn because it was stolen money , and how one silver penny floated on the top .
' that i took ,' said the boy , ' because it was honest .
'' you are a born fool ,' said his mother , for she was very angry ; ' were naught else honest than what floats on water , there wouldn ' t be much honesty in the world .
and even though the money were stolen ten times over , still you had found it ; and i tell you again what i told you before , every one is nearest to his own self .
had you only taken that money we might have lived well and happily all our days .
but a ne ' er - do - weel thou art , and a ne ' er - do - weel thou wilt be , and now i won ' t drag on any longer toiling and moiling for thee .
be off with thee into the world and earn thine own bread .
'" so the lad had to go out into the wide world , and he went both far and long seeking a place .
but wherever he came , folk thought him too little and weak , and said they could put him to no use .
at last he came to a merchant , and there he got leave to be in the kitchen and carry in wood and water for the cook .
well , after he had been there a long time , the merchant had to make a journey into foreign lands , and so he asked all his servants what he should buy and bring home for each of them .
so , when all had said what they would have , the turn came to the scullion , too , who brought in wood and water for the cook .
then he held out his penny .
' well , what shall i buy with this ?'
asked the merchant ; ' there won ' t be much time lost over this bargain .
'' buy what i can get for it .
it is honest , that i know ,' said the lad . that his master gave his word to do , and so he sailed away . so when the merchant had unladed his ship and laded her again in foreign lands , and bought what he had promised his servants to buy , he came down to his ship , and was just going to shove off from the wharf .
then all at once it came into his head that the scullion had sent out a silver penny with him , that he might buy something for him .
' must i go all the way back to the town for the sake of a silver penny ?
one would then have small gain in taking such a beggar into one ' s house ,' thought the merchant . just then an old wife came walking by with a bag at her back .
' what have you got in your bag , mother ?'
asked the merchant .' oh !
nothing else than a cat .
i can ' t afford to feed it any longer , so i thought i would throw it into the sea , and make away with it ,' answered the woman . then the merchant said to himself , ' didn ' t the lad say i was to buy what i could get for his penny ?'
so he asked the old wife if she would take four farthings for her cat .
yes !
the goody was not slow to say ' done ,' and so the bargain was soon struck . now when the merchant had sailed a bit , fearful weather fell on him , and such a storm , there was nothing for it but to drive and drive till he did not know whither he was going .
at last he came to a land on which he had never set foot before , and so up he went into the town . at the inn where he turned in , the board was laid with a rod for each man who sat at it .
the merchant thought it very strange , for he couldn ' t at all make out what they were to do with all these rods ; but he sate him down , and thought he would watch well what the others did , and do like them .
well !
as soon as the meat was set on the board , he saw well enough what the rods meant ; for out swarmed mice in thousands , and each one who sate at the board had to take to his rod and flog and flap about him , and naught else could be heard than one cut of the rod harder than the one which went before it .
sometimes they whipped one another in the face , and just gave themselves time to say , ' beg pardon ,' and then at it again .
' hard work to dine in this land !'
said the merchant .
' but don ' t folk keep cats here ?'' cats ?'
they all asked , for they did not know what cats were . so the merchant sent and fetched the cat he had bought for the scullion , and as soon as the cat got on the table , off ran the mice to their holes , and folks had never in the memory of man had such rest at their meat . then they begged and prayed the merchant to sell them the cat , and at last , after a long , long time , he promised to let them have it ; but he would have a hundred dollars for it ; and that sum they gave and thanks besides . so the merchant sailed off again ; but he had scarce got good sea - room before he saw the cat sitting up at the mainmast head , and all at once again came foul weather and a storm worse than the first , and he drove and drove till he got to a country where he had never been before .
the merchant went up to an inn , and here , too , the board was spread with rods ; but they were much bigger and longer than the first .
and , to tell the truth , they had need to be ; for here the mice were many more , and every mouse was twice as big as those he had before seen . so he sold the cat again , and this time he got two hundred dollars for it , and that without any haggling . so when he had sailed away from that land and got a bit out at sea , there sat grimalkin again at the masthead ; and the bad weather began at once again , and the end of it was , he was again driven to a land where he had never been before . he went ashore , up to the town , and turned into an inn .
there , too , the board was laid with rods , but every rod was an ell and a half long , and as thick as a small broom ; and the folk said that to sit at meat was the hardest trial they had , for there were thousands of big ugly rats , so that it was only with sore toil and trouble one could get a morsel into one ' s mouth , ' twas such hard work to keep off the rats .
so the cat had to be fetched up from the ship once more , and then folks got their food in peace .
then they all begged and prayed the merchant , for heaven ' s sake , to sell them his cat .
for a long time he said , ' no ;' but at last , he gave his word to take three hundred dollars for it .
that sum they paid down at once , and thanked him and blessed him for it into the bargain . now , when the merchant got out to sea , he fell a - thinking how much the lad had made out of the penny he had sent out with him .
' yes , yes , some of the money he shall have ,' said the merchant to himself ; ' but not all .
me it is that he has to thank for the cat i bought ; and , besides , every man is nearest to his own self .
' but as soon as ever the merchant thought this , such a storm and gale arose that every one thought the ship must founder .
so the merchant saw there was no help for it , and he had to vow that the lad should have every penny ; and , no sooner had he vowed this vow , than the weather turned good , and he got a snoring breeze fair for home . so , when he got to land , he gave the lad the six hundred dollars , and his daughter besides ; for now the little scullion was just as rich as his master , the merchant , and even richer ; and , after that , the lad lived all his days in mirth and jollity ; and he sent for his mother and treated her as well as or better than he treated himself ; for , said the lad , ' i don ' t think that every one is nearest to his own self .'
