once on a time there were two goodies , who quarrelled , as women often will ; and when they had nothing else to quarrel about , they fell to fighting about their husbands , as to which was the silliest of them .
the longer they strove the worse they got , and at last they had almost come to pulling caps about it , for , as every one knows , it is easier to begin than to end , and it is a bad look out when wit is wanting .
at last , one of them said there was nothing she could not get her husband to believe , if she only said it , for he was as easy as a troll .
then the other said there was nothing so silly that she could not get her husband to do , if she only said it must be done , for he was such a fool , he could not tell b from a bull ' s foot .' well !
let us put it to the proof , which of us can fool them best , and then we ' ll see which is the silliest .'
that was what they said once , and so it was settled . now when the first husband , master northgrange came home from the wood , his goody said --' heaven help us both !
what is the matter !
you are surely ill , if you are not at death ' s door ?
'' nothing ails me but want of meat and drink ,' said the man .
' now , heaven be my witness !'
screamed out the wife , ' it gets worse and worse .
you look just like a corpse in face ; you must go to bed !
dear !
dear !
this never can last long !'
and so she went on till she got her husband to believe he was hard at death ' s door , and she put him to bed ; and then she made him fold his hands on his breast , and shut his eyes ; and so she stretched his limbs , and laid him out , and put him into a coffin ; but that he might not be smothered while he lay there , she had some holes made in the sides , so that he could breathe and peep out . the other goody , she took a pair of carding combs , and began to card wool ; but she had no wool on them .
in came the man , and saw this tomfoolery .
' there ' s no use ,' he said , ' in a wheel without wool ; but carding combs , without wool , is work for a fool .
'' without wool !'
said the goody ; ' i have wool , only you can ' t see it ; it ' s of the fine sort .'
so , when she had carded it all , she took her wheel , and fell a - spinning .' nay !
nay !
this is all labour lost !"
said the man .
' there you sit , wearing out your wheel , as it spins and hums , and all the while you ' ve nothing on it .
'' nothing on it !'
said the goody ; ' the thread is so fine , it takes better eyes than yours to see it , that ' s all .
' so , when her spinning was over , she set up her loom , and put the woof in , and threw the shuttle , and wove cloth .
then she took it out of the loom and pressed it and cut it out , and sewed a new suit of clothes for her husband out of it , and when it was ready , she hung the suit up in the linen closet .
as for the man , he could see neither cloth nor clothes ; but as he had once for all got it into his head that it was too fine for him to see , he went on saying , ' aye , aye , i understand it all , it is so fine because it is so fine .' well !
in a day or two his goody said to him ,' to - day you must go to a funeral .
farmer northgrange is dead , and they bury him to - day , and so you had better put on your new clothes .
'' yes , very true , he must go to the funeral ;' and she helped him on with his new suit , for it was so fine , he might tear it asunder if he put it on alone . so when he came up to the farm , where the funeral was to be , they had all drank hard and long , and you may fancy their grief was not greater when they saw him come in in his new suit .
but when the train set off for the churchyard , and the dead man peeped through the breathing holes , he burst out into a loud fit of laughter .' nay !
nay !'
he said , ' i can ' t help laughing , though it is my funeral , for if there isn ' t olof southgrange walking to my funeral stark naked !
' when the bearers heard that , they were not slow in taking the lid off the coffin , and the other husband , he in the new suit , asked how it was that he , over whom they had just drank his funeral ale , lay there in his coffin and chatted and laughed , when it would be more seemly if he wept .' ah !'
said the other ; ' you know tears never yet dug up any one out of his grave -- that ' s why i laughed myself to life again .
' but the end of all their talk was that it came out that their goodies had played them those tricks .
so the husbands went home , and did the wisest thing either of them had done for a long time ; and if any one wishes to know what it was , he had better go and ask the birch cudgel .
