once on a time there was a man who was out on a journey ; so at last he came to a big and a fine farm , and there was a house so grand that it might well have been a little palace .
' here it would be good to get leave to spend the night ,' said the man to himself , as he went inside the gate .
hard by stood an old man with grey hair and beard , who was hewing wood .
' good evening , father ,' said the wayfarer .
' can i have house - room here to - night ?
'' i ' m not father in the house ,' said the grey - beard .
' go into the kitchen , and talk to my father .
' the wayfarer went into the kitchen , and there he met a man who was still older , and he lay on his knees before the hearth , and was blowing up the fire .
' good evening , father ,' said the wayfarer .
' can i get house - room to - night ?
' i ' m not father in the house ,' said the old man ; ' but go in and talk to my father .
you ' ll find him sitting at the table in the parlour .
' so the wayfarer went into the parlour , and talked to him who sat at the table .
he was much older than either of the other two , and there he sat , with his teeth chattering , and shivered and shook , and read out of a big book , almost like a little child .
' good evening , father ,' said the man .
' will you let me have house - room here to - night ?
'' i ' m not father in the house ,' said the man who sat at the table , whose teeth chattered , and who shivered and shook ; ' but speak to my father yonder -- he who sits on the bench .
' so the wayfarer went to him who sat on the bench , and he was trying to fill himself a pipe of tobacco ; but he was so withered up and his hands shook so with the palsy that he could scarce hold the pipe .
' good evening , father ,' said the wayfarer again .
' can i get house - room here to - night ?
'' i ' m not father in the house ,' said the old withered fellow ; ' but speak to my father , who lies in bed yonder .
' so the wayfarer went to the bed , and there lay an old , old man , who but for his pair of big staring eyes scarcely looked alive .
' good evening , father ,' said the wayfarer .
' can i get house - room here to - night ?
'' i ' m not father in the house ,' said the old carle with the big eyes ; ' but go and speak to my father , who lies yonder in the cradle .
' yes , the wayfarer went to the cradle , and there lay a carle as old as the hills , so withered and shrivelled he was no bigger than a baby , and it was hard to tell that there was any life in him , except that there was a sound of breathing every now and then in his throat .
' good evening , father ,' said the wayfarer .
' may i have house - room here to - night ?
' it was long before he got an answer , and still longer before the carle brought it out ; but the end was he said , as all the rest , that he was not father in the house .
' but go ,' said he , ' and speak to my father -- you ' ll find him hanging up in the horn yonder against the wall .
' so the wayfarer stared about round the walls , and at last he caught sight of the horn ; but when he looked for him who hung in it he looked more like a film of ashes that had the likeness of a man ' s face .
then he was so frightened that he screamed out ,--' good evening , father !
will you let me have house - room here to - night ?
' then a chirping came out of the horn like a little tom - tit , and it was - all he could do to make out that the chirping meant , ' yes , my child .
' and now a table came in which was covered with the costliest dishes , and with ale and brandy ; and when he had eaten and drank there came in a good bed , with reindeer skins ; and the wayfarer was so very glad because he had at last found the right father in the house .
