" once on a time there was a clerk in our parish , who was very sharp set after all that was nice and good .
all the parish said his brains were in his belly , for though he was very fond of pretty girls and buxom wives , still he liked good meat and drink even better .
"' aye , aye ,' said our clerk ; ' one can ' t live long on love and the south wind .'
that was his motto , and that was why he kept company most with well - to - do - house - wives , with those who were new wedded , or with pretty lasses who were sure to marry rich husbands , for there you were sure to find titbits both of beauty and food .
that was what our clerk thought .
it wasn ' t every one , indeed , who thought it so fine to have such a cupboard lover , but yet there were some who looked on it as fine enough for them , for , after all , a parish clerk stands a little higher than a farmer .
" now it fell out there was a rich young lass who had married our clerk ' s next - door neighbour .
there he crept in and out , and soon got good friends with the husband , and better friends still with his wife .
when the husband was at home all went well between them , but as soon as he was away at the mill , or in the wood , or at floating timber , or at a meeting , the goody sent word to the clerk , and then the two spent the day in revelling and mirth .
there was no one who found this out , before the ploughboy got wind of it , and he thought he would just speak of it to his master ; but , somehow or other , he couldn ' t find a fitting time till one day when they were together in the outfield gathering leaves for litter .
there they chatted this and that about lasses and wives , and the master thought he had made a lucky hit in marrying such a rich and pretty wife , and he said as much outright .
"' thank god , she is both good and clever .
'"' aye , aye ,' said the lad ; ' every man is welcome to believe what he likes , but if you knew her as well as i do , you wouldn ' t say such words at random .
pretty women are like wind in warm summer weather .
' and love is such that , willy , nilly , it takes up with a clerk as well as a lily .
'"' what ' s that you say ?'
said the man .
"' i have long thought i would tell you that there ' s a black bull that walks hoof to hoof and horn to horn with that milk - white cow in your mead , master -- that ' s what i wanted to say .
'"' one can say much in a summer day ,' said the man ; ' but i can ' t understand what this points to .
'"' is it so ?'
said the lad .
' well , i have long thought of telling you that our clerk is often and ever in our house with the mistress , and how they lived as though there was a bridal every day , while we scarce get so much as the leavings of their good cheer .
'"' he who will ever taste and try , will burn his fingers in the pie ,' said his master .
' i don ' t believe a word of what you say .
'"' it ' s a strange ear that will never hear ,' said the lad ; ' but seeing is believing , and if you will listen to me , i ' m ready to wager ten dollars that you shall soon have the proof in your own hands .
'"' done ,' said the master ; ' he would bet ten dollars ; nay , for that matter , he would bet horse and farm , and a hundred dollars into the bargain .
'" well , that wager was to stand .
' but an old fox is hard to hunt ,' said the lad , and so his master must say and do all that his ploughboy wished .
when they got home he was to say they must set off for the river and land timber , and his wife must put up some food for them in hot haste ; it was best to look out while the weather was fine , it might turn to storm in a trice .
yes !
that was what the husband said , and the food was ready to the minute .
the lad put the horses to the timber drags , and off they went , but no farther than half a mile ; there they put the horses up at a farm , and turned in themselves .
as the night came on they went back , and when they got home , the door was locked fast .
"' now we have him ,' said the lad ; ' it ' s hard to keep off the field to which one is wont .
'" so they went by the back way from the garden , and so through a trap - door in the cellar into the kitchen .
then they struck a light and went into the parlour , and saw what they saw .
well !
our clerk had eaten so well that he lay snoring with his mouth open and his nose in the air ; as for the goody , she was not awake either .
"' now you see i was right ; seeing is believing , master ,' said the lad .
"' may i never speak the truth again ,' said the man , ' if i would have believed ten men telling it .
'"' hush , be still ,' said the lad , and took him out again .
"' man ' s law is not land ' s law ,' said the lad ; ' but even a bear can be tamed if you know how to deal with him .
have you any lead , master ?" yes !
he had , he was sure , more than seventy bullets in his pouch .
then it was all right .
they took a sauce - pan , and melted the lead on the spot , and ran it down our clerk ' s throat .
"' every man has his own taste ,' said the lad , ' and that ' s why all meat is eaten ,' as he heard the molten lead bubbling and frizzling in our clerk ' s throat .
" then they went out by the way they got in , and began to knock and thunder at the front door .
the wife woke up and asked who was there .
"' it is i , open the door , i say ,' said the husband .
" then she gave our clerk a nudge in the ribs .
' it is the master ; the master is back ,' she said .
but no !
he did not mind her , and never so much as stirred .
then she put her knees to his side , and tumbled him on to the floor , and jumped up and took him by the legs , and dragged him to the heap of wood behind the stove , and there she hid him .
till she had done that she had no time to open the door to her husband .
"' were you gone after christening water , that you were gone so long ?'
asked the man ."' oh !'
she answered ; ' i dozed off again to sleep , and i did not think it could ever be you either .'"' well !'
said her husband ; ' now you must bring out some food , for me and the boy , we are a ' most starved .
'"' i ' ve got no food ready ,' said the goody .
' how can you think of such a thing ?
i never thought you would be back either to - day or to - morrow .
why you know you were to go to the river to land timber .
'"' one can ' t hang a hungry man up on the wall like a clock ,' said the lad ; ' and self - help is the best help ; shall i bring in the food we packed up , master .
'" yes ; they did that , and they sat down to eat out of the knapsack ; but when they got up to put a log or two on the fire , there lay our clerk among the pile of wood .
"' why who in the world is this ?'
asked the man ."' oh !
oh !
it ' s only a beggar man who came here so late and begged for house - room ; he was quite content if he might only lie among the firewood ,' said the goody .
"' a pretty beggar ,' said the man ; ' why he has got silver buckles to his shoes , and silver buttons at his knees .
'"' all are not beggars who are tattered and torn ,' said the lad ; ' but i ' m blessed if this isn ' t our parish clerk .
'"' what was he doing here , mistress ,' asked her husband , who all the while kept on pulling and kicking at him .
but our clerk never so much as stirred or lifted a finger , there stood the goody fumbling and stammering , and not knowing what to say .
all she could do was to bite her thumb .
"' i see it in your face , what you have done , mistress ,' said her husband .
' but life is hard to lose , and , after all , he was our parish clerk .
if i did what was right , i should send off at once for the sheriff .
'"' heaven help us ,' said his wife ; ' only get our clerk out of the way .
'"' this is your matter , and not mine ,' said the man .
' i never asked him hither , nor sent for him ; but if you can get any one to help you to get rid of him , i won ' t stand in your way .
'" then she took the lad on one side , and said ,--"' i ' ve laid up some woollen stuff for my husband , but i ' ll give it to you for clothes , if you ' ll only get our clerk buried , so that he shall never be seen or heard of again .
'"' there ' s no saying what one can do till one tries .
if we drive in the frost , we shall find it slippery , to our cost .
have you ropes and cord , master ?
if so , i ' ll see if i can ' t cure this .'" well !
he got our clerk fast in a slipknot , threw him on his back , caught up his hat as well , and away he went .
but he hadn ' t gone far along the path in the meadow when he met some horses ; so he caught one of these , and tied and bound our clerk fast on his back .
he put his hat , too , on his head , and his hand down on his thigh , and there he sat upright , and jogged up and down just as a man on horseback .
"' one may kill trolls at any time of night ,' said the lad , when he got home ; ' who can say when a man is ' fey .'
but he will never rise up who is safe buried under ground , and the cock that is slain crows never again .
'" now , whether all this were true or no , there was a way from the meadow across the fields to a barn , and along it they had carted hay , and dropped it as they went along ; so the horse went that way , picking up the hay as he went , and out in that barn were two men watching for thieves who used to steal the hay , for it had been a bad year for fodder .
"' here comes the thief ,' they said , when they heard the horse ' s hoofs ; ' now we shall catch him .
'"' who ' s there ,' they called out , so that it rang against the hillside .
no !
there was no answer , the horse paid little heed , and our clerk less .
"' if you don ' t answer i ' ll send a bullet through your brains , you horse - thief ,' they both called out , and then off went the gun , at which the horse gave such a sudden jump , that our clerk gave a bob , and fell bump on the ground .
"' i think ,' said one of the watchers , as he jumped up to look , ' i think you ' ve shot him dead as mutton ;' and then , when he saw who it was , ' oh lord !'
he said , ' if it ain ' t our parish clerk .
you ought to have aimed at his legs , and not killed him outright .
'"' what ' s done is done , and can ' t be helped ,' said the other .
' least said soonest mended .
we must keep our ears close , and bury him for a little while among the hay in the barn .'" yes !
they did that , and when it was over , they lay them down to rest .
in a little while came some one puffing and stamping , that the field shook again .
the two who lay among the hay nudged one another , for they thought it was thieves again .
close to the barn was a stepping - stone , and there the new - comer sat down with his load , and began to talk to himself .
he had been killing pigs at a farm a few days before , and thought he had been paid too little for his work , too little pay and too little board , and so he had set off and stolen the biggest porker .
' he that swaps with a bear always comes worst off ,' he said ; ' and so it ' s best to help one ' s self to what is right , and a little share is better than a long law - suit .
but , bitter death !
if i haven ' t forgotten my gloves ; if they find them at the farm , they ' ll soon find out who has inherited their porker .'
and , as he said this , he bolted back after his gloves .
" the two who were in the barn lay and listened to all this .
"' he who lays traps for others , comes into the trap himself ,' said one .
"' there ' s no sin in stealing from a thief ,' said the other ; ' and no one is hanged , save those who can ' t steal right .
it would be fine fun to get rid of our clerk in an easy way , and get a fat pig instead .
i think , old chap , we had better make a swap .
'" the other burst out laughing at this , and so they tumbled the pig out of the sack and tossed in our clerk , head foremost , hat and all , and tied up the mouth of the sack as tight as they could .
" just as they had done , back came the thief flying with his gloves , snatched up the sack , and strode off home .
there he cast the sack down on the floor at his goody ' s feet .
"' here ' s what i call a porker , old lass ,' he said .
"' how grand !'
said the goody .
' nothing is all very fine to the eye , but not to the mouth .
one can ' t get on without meat , for meat is man ' s strength .
thank heaven we have now a bit of meat in the house , and shall be able to live well awhile .
'"' i took the biggest i could ,' said the man , who sat down in his armchair , and puffed and wiped the sweat off his brow .
' he had both breeches and drawers , he was well covered , that he was .'
by which he meant the pig was well fed and fat .
then he went on , ' have you any meat in the house , old lass ?
'"' no ,' she said ; ' meat !
where should i get meat ?
'"' make up the fire then ,' said the man ; ' and sharpen your knife , and cut off a wee bit , and fry it with salt , and let ' s have a pork chop .
'" she did as he bade , and tore open the mouth of the sack , and was just going to cut off a steak .
"' what ' s all this ?'
she cried .
' he has got his trotters on ,' when she saw his shoes ; ' and he ' s as black as a coal .
'"' don ' t you know ,' said her husband ; ' all cats are grey in the dark , and all pigs black .
'"' i dare say ,' she said ; ' but black or white is always bright , and a fog is not like a bilberry .
this pig has got breeches on .
'"' plague take him !'
said the man .
' i know well enough he is covered with fat all down his legs .
haven ' t i carried him till the sweat ran down my face ?
'"' nay , nay !'
said the goody .
' he has silver buckles in his shoes , and silver buttons at his knees .
my !
if it isn ' t our parish clerk !'
she screamed out .
"' i tell you it was a fat pig i took ,' said the man , as he jumped up to see how things stood .
' well !
well !
seeing is believing .'
it was our clerk , both with shoes and buckles ; but , for all , he stuck to it , it was the fattest pig he had put into the sack .
"' but what ' s done can ' t be undone ,' he said ; ' the best servant is one ' s own self ; but , for all that , help is good , even if it comes out of the porridge - pot ; wake up our mary , old girl .
'" now you must know mary was their daughter , a ready and trusty lass ; she had the strength of a man too , and always had her wits about her .
so she was to take our clerk and bury him in an out - of - the - way dale , so that nothing should ever be heard of him .
if she did this , she was to have a new suit of working clothes , which were meant for her mother ." well !
the lassie took our clerk round the body , tossed him on her back , and strode off from the farm , not forgetting to take his hat .
but when she had gone a bit of the way , she heard a fiddle going , for there was a dance at a farm near the road , and so she crept in and set our clerk down upright behind the back - stairs .
there he sat with his hat between his hands , just as though he were begging an alms , and leaning against the wall and a post .
" after a while came a girl in a flurry .
"' i wonder whoever this can be ,' she said .
' the master of the house is as grey as a goose , but this fellow is black as a raven .
halloa , you sir , why are you sitting there , blocking up the way ?
one can scarce get by .
'" but our clerk said never a word .
"' are you poor ?
do you beg for a penny for heaven ' s sake ?
ah !
poor fellow !
here ' s two pence for you ,' and as she said this she tossed them into his hat .
still our clerk said never a word .
she waited a little , for she thought he would say ' thank you ,' but our clerk did not so much as nod his head .
"' no , i never ,' said the girl , when she went back into the ball - room .
' i never did see the like of a beggar who sits out yonder by the staircase .
he isn ' t at all like a starling on a fence ,' she went on ; ' for he won ' t answer , and he won ' t say " thank you ," and won ' t so much as lift a finger , though i did give him two pence .
'"' the least a beggar can do is to say " thank you ,"' cried a young sheriff ' s clerk who was of the party .
' he must be a pretty fellow whom i cannot get to speak , for i ' ve made thieves and stiff - necked folk open their mouths wide before this .
'" as he said this he ran out to the stairs , and bawled out in our clerk ' s ear , for he thought he was hard of hearing .
"' what do you sit here for , you sir ?'
and then again , ' are you poor ?
do you beg ?
'" no , our clerk said never a word .
so he took out half - a - dollar , and threw it into his hat , saying , ' there ' s something for you .'
but our clerk was still silent , and made no sign .
so when he could get no thanks out of him , the sheriff ' s officer gave him a blow under the ear , as hard as he could , and down fell our clerk head over heels across the staircase .
and you may be sure the girl mary was not slow in running to the spot .
"' are you in a swoon , or are you dead , father ,' she screeched out , and then she went on screaming and bewailing herself .
"' it ' s quite true ,' she said ; ' there ' s no peace for the poor after all , but i never yet heard of any one laying themselves out to strike beggars dead .'"' hush !
hold your tongue ,' said the sheriff ' s officer .
' don ' t make a fuss .
here you have ten dollars , keep your peace and take him away .
i only gave him a blow that made him swoon .'" well !
she was glad enough .
' money brings money ,' she thought ; ' with fair words and money , one can go far in a day , and one need never care for food with a purse full of pence .'
so she took our clerk on her back again , and strode off to the nearest farm , and there she put him athwart the brink of the well .
when our mary got home she said she had borne him off to the wood , and buried him far far away in a side dale .
"' thank heaven ,' said the goody .
' now we are well quit of him , you shall have all i promised , and more besides .
be sure of that .
'" so there lay our clerk , as though he were peering down into the well , till at dawn of day the ploughboy came running up to draw water .
"' why are you lying there , and what are you gazing at ?
out of the way .
i want some water ,' said the lad ." no !
he neither stirred hand or foot .
then the lad let drive at him , so that it went plump , and there lay our clerk in the well .
then he must have help to get him out , but there was no help for it till the hind came with a boat - hook and dragged him out ."' why !
it ' s our parish clerk !'
they all bawled out , and they all thought he had eaten and drank so much at some feast , that he had fallen asleep by the well - side .
" but when the master of the house came and saw our clerk , and heard how it had all happened , he said ,--"' harm watches while men sleep ; but man ' s scathe is the worst scathe .
when one pot strikes against another , both break .
take the saddle and lay it on blackie , and ride to fetch the sheriff , my lad , and then we shall be out of harm ' s way , for our clerk ' s sake .
mishaps never come single , but it ' s hard to drown on dry land .'
that was what the master said ." yes !
the lad rode off to the sheriff , and after a while the sheriff came .
but , as the saying is , more haste , worse speed , and work done in haste will never last .
so it took time before they got the doctor and witnesses to come .
now you all know we owe a death to god ; but then it was made as plain as day that our clerk had been killed three times before he tumbled into the well .
first the ladle of lead had taken away his breath , next he had a bullet through his forehead , and third and last his neck was broken .
surely he was ' fey ' when he set out to see the goody .
it is hard to tell how all this was found out at last ; but tongues will clack behind a man ' s back , and hard things are said of a man when he ' s dead ."
