" once on a time there was a poor householder , who had an only son , but he was so lazy and unhandy , this son , that he would neither mix with folk nor turn his hand to anything in the world .
so the father said :"' if i ' m not to go on for ever feeding this long lazy fellow , i must pack him off a long way , where no one knows him .
if he runs away then it won ' t be so easy for him to come home .'" yes !
the man took his son with him , and went about far and wide offering him as a serving man ; but there was no one who would have him .
" so last of all they came to a rich man , of whom the story went that he turned a penny over seven times before he let it go .
he was to take the lad as a ploughboy , and there he was to serve three years without wages .
but when the three years were over the man was to go to the town two mornings , and buy the first thing he met that was for sale , but the third morning the lad was to go himself to the town , and buy the first thing he met , and these three things he was to have instead of wages ." well !
the lad served his three years out , and behaved better than any one would have believed .
he was not the best ploughboy in the world , sure enough ; but then his master was not of the best sort either , for he let him go the whole time with the same clothes he had when he came , so that at last they were nothing else but patch on patch and mend on mend .
now , when the man was to set off and buy he was up and away at cockcrow , long before dawn .
"' dear wares must be seen by daylight ,' he said ; ' they are not to be found on the road to town so early .
still , they may be dear enough , for after all it ' s all risk and chance what i find .'" well !
the first person he found in the street was an old hag , and she carried a basket with a cover .
"' good day , granny ,' said the man .
"' good day to you , father ,' said the old hag .
"' what have you got in your basket ?'
asked the man .
"' do you mean business ?'
said the old hag .
"' yes , i do , for i was to buy the first thing i met .
'"' well , if you want to know you had better buy it ,' said the old hag .
"' but what does it cost ?'
asked the man ." yes !
she must have fourpence .
" the man thought that no such very high price after all .
he couldn ' t do better , and lifted the lid , and it was a puppy that lay in the basket .
" when the man came home from his trip to town the lad stood out in the yard , and wondered what he should get for his wages for the first year .
"' so soon home , master ?'
said the lad .
" yes , he was .
"' what was it you bought ?'
he asked .
"' what i bought ,' said the man , ' was not worth much .
i scarcely know if i ought to show it ; but i bought the first thing that was to be had , and it was a puppy .
'"' now , thank you so much ,' said the lad .
' i have always been so fond of dogs .
'" next morning things went no better .
the man was up at dawn again , and he had not got well into the town before he saw the old hag with her basket .
"' good day , granny ,' he said .
"' good day to you , sir ,' she said .
"' what have you got in your basket to - day ?'
asked the man .
"' if you wish to know you had better buy it ,' said the old hag .
"' what does it cost ?'
asked the man ."' yes !
she must have fourpence ; she never had more than one price ,' she said .
" so the man said he would take it ; it would be hard to find anything cheaper .
when he lifted the lid this time there lay a kitten in it .
" when he got home the lad stood out in the yard , waiting and wondering what he should get for his wages the second year .
"' is that you , master ?'
he said .
" yes , there he was .
"' what did you buy to - day now ?'
asked the lad ."' oh !
it was worse , and no better ,' said the man ; ' but it was just as we bargained .
i bought the first thing i met , and it was nothing else than this kitten .
'"' you could not have met anything better ,' said the lad ; ' i have been as fond of cats all my life as of dogs .
'"' well ,' thought the man , ' i did not get so badly out of that after all ; but there ' s another day to come , when he is to go to town himself .
'" the third morning the lad set off , and just as he got into the town he met the same old hag with her basket on her arm .
"' good morning , granny !'
said the lad .
"' good morning to you , my son ,' said the old hag .
"' what have you got in your basket ?
'"' if you want to know you had better buy it ,' said the old hag .
"' will you sell it then ?'
asked the lad .
" yes , she would ; and fourpence was her price .
"' that was cheap enough ,' said the lad , ' and he would have it , for he was to buy the first thing he met .
'"' now you may take it , basket and all ,' said the old hag ; ' but mind you don ' t look inside it before you get home .
do you hear what i say ?
'"' nay , nay , never fear , he wouldn ' t look inside it ; was it likely ?'
but for all that he walked and wondered what there could be inside the basket , and whether he would or no he could not help just lifting the lid and peeping in .
in the twinkling of an eye out popped a little lizard , and ran away so fast along the street that the air whistled after it .
there was nothing else in the basket ."' nay !
nay !'
cried the lad , ' stop a bit , and don ' t run off so .
you know i have bought you .
'"' stick me in the tail -- stick me in the tail !'
bawled the lizard .
" well , the lad was not slow in running after it and sticking his knife into its tail just as it was crawling into a hole in the wall , and that very minute it was turned into a young man as fine and handsome as the grandest prince , and a prince he was indeed .
"' now you have saved me ,' said the prince , ' for that old hag with whom you and your master have dealt is a witch , and me she has changed into a lizard , and my brother and sister into a puppy and kitten .
'"' a pretty story !'
said the lad .
"' yes ,' said the prince ; ' and now she was on her way to cast us into the fjord and kill us ; but if any one came and wanted to buy us she must sell us for fourpence each ; that was settled , and that was all my father could do .
now you must come home to him and get the meed for what you have done .
'"' i dare say ,' said the lad , ' it ' s a long way off ?
'"' oh ,' said the prince , ' not so far after all .
there it is yonder ,' he said , as he pointed to a great hill in the distance .
" so they set off as fast as they could , but as was to be weened it was farther off than it looked , and so they did not reach the hill till far on in the night .
" then the prince began to knock and knock .
"' who is that ,' said some one inside the hill , ' that knocks at my door , and spoils my rest ?'
and that some one was so loud of speech that the earth quaked ."' oh !
open the door , father , there ' s a dear ,' said the prince .
' it is your son who has come home again .'" yes !
he opened the door fast and well .
"' i almost thought you lay at the bottom of the sea ,' said the grey - beard .
' but you are not alone , i see ,' he said .
"' this is the lad who saved me ,' said the prince .
' i have asked him hither that you may give him his meed .
'" yes , he would see to that , said the old fellow .
"' but now you must step in ,' he said ; ' i am sure you have need of rest ."" yes !
they went in and sat down , and the old man threw on the fire an armful of dry fuel and one or two logs , so that the fire blazed up and shone as clear as the day in every corner , and whichever way they looked it was grander than grand .
anything like it the lad had never seen before , and such meat and drink as the grey - beard set before them he had never tasted either ; and all the plates , and cups , and stoops , and tankards were all of pure silver or real gold .
" it was not easy to stop the lads .
they ate and drank and were merry , and afterwards they slept till far on next morning .
but the lad was scarcely awake before the grey - beard came with a morning draught in a tumbler of gold .
" so when he had huddled on his clothes and broken his fast , the old man took him round with him and showed him everything that he might choose something that he would like to have as his meed for saving his son .
there was much to see and to choose from you may fancy .
"' now what will you have ?'
said the king ; ' you see there is plenty of choice , you can have what you please .
'" but the lad said , he would think it over and ask the prince .
yes !
the king was willing he should do that ."' well !'
said the prince , ' you have seen many grand things .
'"' yes , i have , as was likely ,' said the lad ; ' but tell me , what shall i choose of all the wealth .
do tell me , for your father says i may choose what i please .
'"' do not take anything of all you have seen ,' said the prince ; ' but he has a little ring on his finger , that you must ask for .'" yes !
he did so , and begged for the little ring which he had on his finger ."' why !
it is the dearest thing i have ,' said the king ; ' but , after all , my son is just as dear and so you shall have it all the same .
do you know now what it is good for ?'" no !
he knew nothing about it .
"' when you have this ring on your finger ,' said the king , ' you can have anything you wish for .
"" so the lad thanked the king , and the king and the prince bade him god speed home , and told him to be sure and take care of the ring .
" so he had not gone far on his way before he thought he would prove what the ring was worth , and so he wished himself a new suit of clothes , and he had scarce wished for them before he had them on him .
and now he was as grand and bright as a new - struck penny .
so he thought it would be fine fun to play his father a trick .
"' he was not so very nice all the time i was at home ;' and so he wished he was standing before his father ' s door , just as ragged as he was of old , and in a second he stood at the door .
"' good day , father , and thank you for our last meal ,' said the lad .
" but when the father saw that he had come back still more ragged and tattered than when he set out , he began to bellow and to bemoan himself .
"' there ' s no helping you ,' he said .
' you have not so much as earned clothes to your back all the time you have been away .
'"' don ' t be in such a way , father ,' said the lad , ' you ought never to judge a man by his clothes ; and now you shall be my spokesman , and go up to the palace and woo the king ' s daughter for me .'
that was what the lad said .
"' oh , fie , fie ,' said the father , ' this is only gibing and jeering .
'" but the lad said it was the right down earnest , and so he took a birch cudgel and drove his father up to the gate of the palace , and there he came hobbling right up to the king with his eyes full of tears .
"' now , now !'
said the king , ' what ' s the matter my man .
if you have suffered wrong , i will see you righted .
'" no , it wasn ' t that , he said , but he had a son who had brought him great sorrow , for he could never make a man of him , and now he must say he had gone clean out of the little wit he had before , and then he went on ,--"' for now he has hunted me up to the palace gate with a big birch cudgel , and forced me to ask for the king ' s daughter to wife .
'"' hold your tongue , my man ,' said the king ; ' and as for this son of yours , go and ask him to come here indoors to me , and then we will see what to make of him .
'" so the lad ran in before the king till his rags fluttered behind him .
"' am i to have your daughter ?
'"' that was just what we were to talk about ,' said the king ; ' perhaps she mayn ' t suit you , and perhaps you mayn ' t suit her either .
'"' that was very likely !'
said the lad .
" now you must know there had just come a big ship from over the sea , and she could be seen from the palace windows .
"' all the same !'
said the king .
' if you are good to make a ship in an hour or two like that lying yonder in the fjord and looking so brave , you may perhaps have her .'
that was what the king said .
"' nothing worse than that !'
said the lad .
" so he went down to the strand and sat down on a sandhill , and when he had sat there long enough , he wished that a ship might be out on the fjord fully furnished with masts , and sails and rigging , the very match of that which lay there already .
and as he wished for it there it lay , and when the king saw there were two ships for one , he came down to the strand to see the rights of it , and there he saw the lad standing out in a boat with a brush in his hand as though he were painting out spots and making blisters in the paint good -- but as soon as he saw the king down on the shore he threw away the brush and said ,--"' now the ship is ready , may i have your daughter ?
'"' this is all very well ,' said the king , ' but you try your hand at another masterpiece first .
if you can build a palace , a match to my palace in one or two hours , we will see about it .'
that was what the king said .
"' nothing worse than that ,' bawled out the lad and strode off .
so when he had sauntered about so long , that the time was nearly up , he wished that a palace might stand there the very match of that which stood there already .
it was not long , i trow , before it stood there , and it was not long either before the king came , both with queen and princess to look about him in the new palace .
there stood the lad again with his broom and swept .
"' here ' s the palace right and ready ,' he called out ' may i have her now ?
'"' very well , very well ,' said the king , ' you may come in and we will talk it over ,' for he saw clearly the lad could do more than eat his meat , and so he walked up and down , and thought and thought how he might be rid of him .
yes !
there they walked , the king first and foremost , and after him the queen , and then the princess next before the lad .
so as they walked along , all at once the lad wished that he might become the handsomest man in all the world , and so he was in a trice .
when the princess saw how handsome he had grown in no time , she gave the queen a nudge , and the queen passed it on to the king , and when they had all stared their full , they saw still more plainly , the lad was more than he seemed to be when he first came in all tattered and torn .
so they settled it among them , that the princess should go daintily to work till she had found out all about him .
yes !
the princess made herself as sweet and as soft as a whole firkin of butter , and coaxed and hoaxed the lad , telling him she could not bear him out of her eyes , day or night .
so when the first evening was coming to an end , she said ,--"' as we are to have one another , you and i , you must keep nothing back from me , dearest , and so you will tell me , i am sure , how you came to make all these grand things .
'"' aye , aye ,' then said the lad , ' all that you ' ll come to know in good time .
only let us be man and wife ; there ' s no good talking about it till then .'
that was what he said .
" the next evening the princess was rather put out .
she could see with half an eye , she said , ' that he couldn ' t care very much for his sweetheart , when he wouldn ' t tell her what she asked him .
so it would be with all the rest of his love - making , when he wouldn ' t meet her wishes in such a little thing .
'" now the lad was quite cut to the heart , and that they might be friends again he told her the whole story from beginning to end .
she was not slow in telling it to the king and queen , and so they laid their heads together how they might get the ring from the lad , and when they had done that they thought it would be no such hard thing to be rid of him .
" at night the princess came with some sleeping - drops , and said , now she would pour out a little philtre for her own true love , for she was sure he did not care enough for her ; that was what she said .
yes !
he thought no harm could come of it , and so he drained off the drink like a man , and in a trice he fell so sound asleep , they might have pulled the house down over his head without waking him .
so the princess took the ring off his finger and put it on her own , and wished the lad might lie on the dung - heap outside in the street , just as tattered and beggarly as he was when he came in , and in his place she wished for the handsomest prince in the world .
in the twinkling of an eye it all happened .
as the night wore on the lad woke up on the dunghill , and at first he thought it was only a dream , but when he found the ring was gone he knew how it had all happened , and then he got so bewildered that he set off and was just going to jump into the lake and drown himself .
" but just then he met the cat which his master had bought for him .
"' whither away ?'
asked the cat .
"' to the lake to drown myself ,' said the lad .
"' don ' t think of it ,' said the cat ; ' you shall get your ring back again , never fear .
'"' oh , shall i , shall i ?'
said the lad .
" by this time the cat was already off , and as she started she met a rat .
"' now i ' ll take and gobble you up ,' said the cat ."' oh !
pray don ' t ,' said the rat , ' and i ' ll get you the ring again .
'"' if so , be quick about it ,' said the cat , ' or ----'" so after they had taken up their abode in the palace , the rat ran about poking his nose into everything , trying to get into the prince and princess ' s bedroom .
at last he found a little hole and crept through it .
then he heard how they lay awake talking , and the rat could tell that the prince had the ring on his finger , for the princess said , ' mind you take great care of my ring , dear .'
that was what she said ; but what the prince said was ,--"' pooh , no one will come in hither after the ring through stone and mortar ; but , for all that , if you think it isn ' t safe on my finger , i can just as well put it into my mouth .
'" in a little while the prince turned over on his back , and tried to go to sleep , and as he did so the ring was just slipping down into his throat , and then he coughed it up , so that it shot out of his mouth and rolled away over the floor -- pop !-- up the rat snapped it and crept off with it to the cat who sat outside watching at the rat - hole .
" all this while the king had laid hands on the lad and put him into a strong tower and doomed him to lose his life , for that he had made jeers and gibes at him and his daughter , and there he was to stay till the day of his death .
now , as the cat was hard at work prowling about trying to steal into the tower with the ring to the lad , a great eagle came flying and pounced down on her and caught her up in his claws and flew away with her over the sea .
but just in the nick of time came a falcon and struck at the eagle , so that he let the cat fall into the sea ; but when the cat felt the cold water , she got so frightened she dropped the ring and swam to shore .
she had not shaken the water off her , and smoothed her coat , before she met the dog which his master had bought for the lad ."' nay !
nay !'
said the cat , and purred and was in a sad way , ' what ' s to be done now ?
the ring is gone and they will take the lad ' s life .
'"' i ' m sure i don ' t know ,' said the dog , ' all i know is that something is riving and rending my inside .
it couldn ' t be worse , if i were going to turn inside out .
'"' now you see what comes of over - eating yourself ,' said the cat .
"' i never eat more than i can carry ,' said the dog ; ' and this time i have eaten nothing but a dead fish which lay floating up and down on the ebb .
'"' may be that fish had swallowed the ring ,' said the cat .
' and now i dare say you are going to pay for it too , for you know you can ' t digest gold .
'"' it may well be ,' said the dog .
' it ' s much the same whether one loses life first or last .
perhaps , the lad ' s life might then be saved .'"' oh !'
said the rat , for he was there too , ' don ' t say that .
i don ' t want much of a hole to creep into , and if the ring is there may i never tell the truth , if i don ' t poke it out .'" well !
the rat crept down the dog ' s throat , and it was not long before he came out again with the ring .
then the cat set off to the tower and clambered up about it , till she found a hole into which she could put her paw , and so she gave back his ring to the lad .
" the lad no sooner got it on his finger than he wished the tower might rend asunder , and at the same moment he stood in the doorway and scolded both the king and queen and the princess as a pack of rogues .
the king was not slow in calling out his warriors , and bade them throw a ring round the tower and seize the lad and settle him whether they took him dead or alive .
but the lad only wished that all the soldiers might stand up to the armpits in the big moss up in the fjeld , and then they had more than enough to get out again , all that were not left sticking there .
after that he began again where he left off with the king and his folk , and when he had got his mouth to say all the bad of them that he knew and willed , he wished they might be shut up all their days in the tower into which they had thrown him .
and when they were safe shut up there , he took the land and realm as his own .
then the dog became a prince and the cat a princess again , her he took and married , and the last i heard of them , was , that they kept it up at the bridal both well and long ."
