once on a time there was a goody who had a son called matthew , but he was so stupid that he had no sense for anything , nor would he do much either ; and the little he did was always topsy - turvy and never right , and so they never called him anything but ' silly matt .
' all this the goody thought bad ; and it was still worse she thought that her son idled about and never turned his hand to anything else than yawning and stretching himself between the four walls . now close to where they lived ran a great river , and the stream was strong and bad to cross .
so , one day , the goody said to the lad , there was no lack of timber there , for it grew almost up to the cottage - wall ; he must cut some down and drag it to the bank and try to build a bridge over the river and take toll , and then he would both have something to do and something to live upon besides . yes !
matt thought so too , for his mother had said it ; what she begged him do , he would do .
that was safe and sure he said , for what she said must be so and not otherwise .
so he hewed down timber and dragged it down and built a bridge .
it didn ' t go so awfully fast with the work , but at any rate he had his hands full while it went on . when the bridge was ready , the lad was to stand down at its end and take toll of those who wanted to cross , and his mother bade him be sure not to let any one over unless they paid the toll .
it was all the same , she said , if it were not always in money .
goods and wares were just as good pay . so the first day came three chaps with each his load of hay , and wanted to cross the bridge .' no !
no !'
said the lad ; ' you can ' t go over till i ' ve taken the toll .
'' we ' ve nothing to pay it with ,' they said .
' well , then !
you can ' t cross ; but it ' s all the same , if it isn ' t money .
goods will do just as well .
' so they gave him each a wisp of hay , and he had as much as would go on a little hand - sledge , and then they had leave to pass over the bridge . next came a pedlar with his pack , who sold needles and thread , and such like small wares , and he wanted to cross .
' you can ' t cross , till you have paid the toll ,' said the lad .
' i ' ve nothing to pay it with ,' said the pedlar .
' you have wares , at any rate .
' so the pedlar took out two needles and gave them him , and then he had leave to cross the bridge .
as for the needles , the lad stuck them into the hay , and soon set off home . so when he got home , he said , ' now , i have taken the toll , and got something to live on .
'' what did you get ?'
asked the goody .' oh !'
said he , ' there came three chaps , each with his load of hay .
they each gave me a wisp of hay , so that i got a little sledge - load ; and next , i got two needles from a pedlar .
'' what did you do with the hay ?'
asked the goody .
' i tried it between my teeth ; but it tasted only of grass , so i threw into the river .
'' you ought to have spread it out on the byre - floor ,' said the goody .' well !
i ' ll do that next time , mother ,' he said .
' and what then did you do with the needles ?'
said the goody .
' i stuck them in the hay !'' ah !'
said his mother .
' you are a born fool .
you should have stuck them in and out of your cap .'' well !
don ' t say another word , mother , and i ' ll be sure to do so next time .
' next day , when the lad stood down at the foot of the bridge again , there came a man from the mill with a sack of meal , and wanted to cross .
' you can ' t cross till you pay the toll ,' said the lad .
' i ' ve no pence to pay it with ,' said the man .' well !
you can ' t cross ,' said the lad ; ' but goods are good pay .'
so he got a pound of meal , and the man had leave to cross . not long after came a smith , with a horse - pack of smith ' s work , and wanted to cross ; but it was still the same .
' you mustn ' t cross till you ' ve paid the toll ,' said the lad .
but he too had no money either ; so he gave the lad a gimlet , and then he had leave to cross . so when the lad got home to his mother , the toll was the first thing she asked about .
' what did you take for toll to - day ?'' oh !
there came a man from the mill with a sack of meal , and he gave me a pound of meal ; and then came a smith , with a horse - load of smith ' s - work , and he gave me a gimlet .
'' and pray what did you do with the gimlet ?'
asked the goody .
' i did as you bade me , mother ,' said the lad .
' i stuck it in and out of my cap .'' oh !
but that was silly ,' said the goody ; ' you oughtn ' t to have stuck it out and in your cap ; but you should have stuck it up your shirt - sleeve .'' ay !
ay !
only be still , mother ; and i ' ll be sure to do it next time .
'' and what did you do with the meal , i ' d like to know ?'
said the goody .' oh !
i did as you bade me , mother .
i spread it over the byre - floor .
'' never heard anything so silly in my born days ,' said the goody ; ' why , you ought to have gone home for a pail and put it into it .'' well !
well !
only be still , mother ,' said the lad ; ' and i ' ll be sure to do it next time .
' next day the lad was down at the foot of the bridge to take toll , and so there came a man with a horse - load of brandy , and wanted to cross .
' you can ' t cross till you pay the toll ,' said the lad .
' i ' ve got no money ,' said the man .
' well , then , you can ' t cross ; but you have goods , of course ;' said the lad .
yes ; so he got half a quart of brandy , and that he poured up his shirt - sleeve . a while after came a man with a drove of goats , and wanted to cross the bridge .
' you can ' t cross till you pay the toll ,' said the lad . well !
he was no richer than the rest .
he had no money ; but still he gave the lad a little billy - goat , and he got over with his drove .
but the lad took the goat and trod it down into a bucket he had brought with him .
so when he got home , the goody asked again --' what did you take to - day ?'' oh !
there came a man with a load of brandy , and from him i got a pint of brandy .
'' and what did you do with it ?
'' i did as you bade me , mother ; i poured it up my shirt - sleeve .'' ay !
but that was silly , my son ; you should have come home to fetch a bottle and poured it into it .'' well !
well !
be still this time , mother , and i ' ll be sure to do what you say next time ,' and then he went on --' next came a man with a drove of goats , and he gave me a little billy - goat , and that i trod down into the bucket .
'' dear me !'
said his mother , ' that was silly , and sillier than silly , my son ; you should have twisted a withy round its neck , and led the billy - goat home by it .'' well !
be still , mother , and see if i don ' t do as you say next time .
' next day he set off for the bridge again to take toll , and so a man came with a load of butter , and wanted to cross .
but the lad said ' he couldn ' t cross unless he paid toll .
'' i ' ve nothing to pay it with ,' said the man .' well !
then you can ' t cross ,' said the lad ; ' but you have goods , and i ' ll take them instead of money .
' so the man gave him a pat of butter , and then he had leave to cross the bridge , and the lad strode off to a grove of willows and twisted a withy , and twined it round the butter , and dragged it home along the road ; but so long as he went he left some of the butter behind him , and when he got home there was none left .
' and what did you take to - day ?'
asked his mother .
' there came a man with a load of butter , and he gave a pat .'' butter !'
said the goody , ' where is it ?
'' i did as you bade me , mother ,' said the lad .
' i tied a withy round the pat and led it home ; but it was all lost by the way .'' oh !'
said the goody , ' you were born a fool , and you ' ll die a fool .
now you are not one bit better off for all your toil ; but had you been like other folk , you might have had both meat and brandy , and both hay and tools .
if you don ' t know better how to behave , i don ' t know what ' s to be done with you .
maybe , you might be more like the rest of the world , and get some sense into you if you were married to some one who could settle things for you , and so i think you had better set off and see about finding a brave lass ; but you must be sure you know how to behave well on the way and to greet folk prettily when you meet them .
'' and pray what shall i say to them ?'
asked the lad .
' to think of your asking that ,' said his mother .
' why , of course , you must bid them " god ' s peace ," don ' t you know that ?'' yes !
yes !
i ' ll do as you bid ,' said the lad ; and so he set off on his way to woo him a wife . so , when he had gone a bit of the way , he met greylegs , the wolf , with her seven cubs ; and when he got so far as to be alongside them , he stood still and greeted them with ' god ' s peace !'
and when he had said that , he went home again .
' i said it all as you bade me , mother ,' said matt .
' and what was that ?'
asked his mother .
' god ' s peace ,' said matt .
' and pray whom did you meet ?
'' a she wolf with seven cubs ; that was all i met ,' said matt .' ay !
ay !
you are like yourself ,' said his mother .
' so it was , and so it will ever be .
why in the world did you say " god ' s peace " to a wolf .
you should have clapped your hands and said --" huf !
huf !
you jade of a she - wolf !"
that ' s what you ought to have said .'' well !
well !
be still , mother ,' he said .
' i ' ll be sure to say so another time ;' and with that he strode off from the farm , and when he had gone a bit on the way , he met a bridal train .
so he stood still when he had got well up to the bride and bridegroom , and clapped his hands and said : ' huf !
huf !
you jade of a she - wolf !'
after that he went home to his mother and said --' i did as you bade me mother ; but i got a good thrashing for it , that i did .
'' what was it you did ?'
she asked .' oh !
i clapped my hands and called out , " huf !
huf !
you jade of a she - wolf !
"'' and what was it you met ?
'' i met a bridal train .'' ah !
you are a fool , and always will be a fool ,' said his mother .
' why should you say such things to a bridal train .
you should have said , " ride happily , bride and bridegroom ."'' well !
well !
see if i don ' t say so next time ,' said the lad , and off he went again . so he met a bear , who was taking a ride on a horse , and matt waited till he came alongside him , and then he said ' a happy ride to you , bride and bridegroom ,' and then he went back to his mother and told her how he had said what she bade him .
' and pray !
what was it you said ?'
she asked .
' i said , ' a happy ride to you both , bride and bridegroom .
'' and whom did you meet ?
'' i met a bear taking a ride on a horse ,' said matt .
' my goodness !
what a fool you are ,' said his mother .
' you ought to have said , " to the de ' il with you ."
that ' s what you ought to have said .'' well !
well !
mother .
i ' ll be sure to say so next time .
' so he set off again , and this time he met a funeral ; and when he had come well up to the coffin , he greeted it and said , ' to the de ' il with you !'
and then he ran home to his mother , and told her he had said what she bade him .
' and what was that ?'
she asked .' oh !
i said , ' to the de ' il with you .
"'' and what was it you met ?
'' i met a funeral ,' said matt ; ' but i got more kicks than halfpence !
'' you didn ' t get half enough ,' said the goody .
' why , of course , you ought to have said , " may your poor soul have mercy ."
that ' s what you ought to have said .' ay !
ay !
mother !
so i will next time , only be still ,' said matt , and off he went again . so when he had gone a bit of the way he fell on two ugly gipsies who were skinning a dog .
so when he came up to them he greeted them and said , ' may your poor soul have mercy ,' and when he had said so he went home and told his mother he had said what she bade him ; but all he got was such a drubbing he could scarce drag one leg after the other .
' but what was it you said ?'
asked the goody .
' may your poor soul have mercy ; that was what i said .
'' and whom did you meet ?
'' a pair of gipsies skinning a dog ,' he said .' well !
well !'
said the goody .
' there ' s no hope of your changing .
you ' ll always be a shame and sorrow to us wherever you go .
i never heard such shocking words .
but now , you must set out and take no notice of any one you meet , for you must be off to woo a wife , and see if you can get some one who knows more of the ways of the world and has a better head on her shoulders than yours .
and now you must behave like other folk , and if all goes well you may bless your stars , and bawl out , hurrah !
' yes , the lad did all that his mother bade him .
he set off and wooed a lass , and she thought he couldn ' t be so bad a fellow after all ; and so she said , ' yes , she would have him .
' when the lad got home the goody wanted to know what his sweetheart ' s name was ; but he did not know .
so the goody got angry and said , he must just set off again , for she would know what the girl ' s name was .
so when matt was going home again he had sense enough to ask her what she was called .
' well ,' she said , ' my name is solvy ; but i thought you knew it already .
' so matt ran off home , and as he went he mumbled to himself ,' solvy , solvy , is my darling ! solvy , solvy , is my darling ?
' but just as he was running as hard as he could to reach home before he forgot it , he tripped over a tuft of grass , and forgot the name again .
so when he got on his feet again he began to search all round the hillock , but all he could find was a spade .
so he seized it and began to dig and search as hard as he could , and as he was hard at it up came an old man .
' what are you digging for ?'
said the man .
' have you lost anything here ?
'' oh yes !
oh yes !
i have lost my sweetheart ' s name , and i can ' t find it again .
'' i think her name is solvy ,' said the man .
' oh yes , that ' s it ,' said matt , and away he ran with the spade in his hand , bawling out ,' solvy , solvy , is my darling !
' but when he had gone a little way he called to mind that he had taken the spade , and so he threw it behind him , right on to the man ' s leg .
then the man began to roar and bemoan himself as though he had a knife stuck in him , and then matt forgot the name again , and ran home as fast as he could , and when he got there , the first thing his mother asked was --' what ' s your sweetheart ' s name ?
' but matt was just as wise as when he set out , for he did not know the name any better the last than the first time .
' you are the same big fool , that you are ,' said the goody .
' you won ' t do any better this time either .
but now i ' ll just set off myself and fetch the girl home , and get you married .
meanwhile you must fetch water up to the fifth plank all round the room , and wash it , and then you must take a little fat and a little lean , and the greenest thing you can find in the cabbage garden , and boil them all up together ; and when you have done that you must put yourself into fine feather , and look smart when your lassie comes , and then you may sit down on the dresser .
' yes , all that matt thought he could do very well .
he fetched water and dashed it about the room in floods , but he couldn ' t get it to stand above the fourth plank , for when it rose higher it ran out .
so he had to leave off that work .
but now you must know , they had a dog whose name was ' fat ,' and a cat whose name was ' lean ;' both these he took and put into the soup - kettle .
as for the greenest thing in the garden , it was a green gown which the goody had meant for her daughter - in - law ; that he cut up into little bits , and away it went into the pot ; but their little pig , which was called ' all ,' he cooked by himself in the brewing tub .
and when matt had done all this he laid hands on a pot of treacle and and a feather pillow .
then he first of all rubbed himself all over with the treacle , and then he tore open the pillow and rolled himself in the feathers , and then he sat down on the dresser out in the kitchen , till his mother and the lassie came . now the first thing the goody missed when she came to her house was the dog , for it always used to meet her out of doors .
the next thing was the cat , for it always met her in the porch , and when the weather was right down good and the sun shone , she even came out into the yard , and met her at the garden gate .
nor could she see the green gown she had meant for her daughter - in - law either , and her piggy - wiggy , which followed her grunting wherever she went , he was not there either .
so she went in to see about all this ; but as soon as ever she lifted the latch , out poured the water through the doorway like a waterfall , so that they were almost borne away by the flood , both the goody and the lassie . so they had to go round by the back door , and when they got inside the kitchen there sat that figure of fun all befeathered .
' what have you done ?'
said the goody .
' i did just as you bade me , mother ,' said matt .
' i tried to get the water up to the fifth plank , but as fast as ever i poured it in it ran out again , and so i could only get up as high as the fourth plank .'' well !
well !
but " fat " and " lean ," said the goody , who wished to turn it off ; ' what have you done with them ?
'' i did as you bade me , mother ,' said matt .
' i took and put them into the soup - kettle .
they both scratched and bit , and they mewed and whined , and fat was strong and kicked against it ; but he had to go in at last all the same ; and as for " all ," he ' s cooking by himself in the brewing tub in the brew - house , for there wasn ' t room for him in the soup - kettle .
'' but what have you done with that new green gown i meant for my daughter - in - law ?'
said the goody , trying to hide his silliness .' oh !
i did as you bade me , mother .
it hung out in the cabbage - garden , and as it was the greatest thing there , i took it and cut it up small , and yonder it boils in the soup .
' away ran the goody to the chimney - corner , tore off the pot and turned it upside down with all that was in it .
then she filled it anew and put it on to boil .
but when she had time to look at matt she was quite shocked .
' why is it you are such a figure ?'
she cried .
' i did as you bade me , mother ,' said matt .
' first i rubbed myself all over with treacle to make myself sweet for my bride , and then i tore open the pillow and put myself into fine feathers .
' well , the goody turned it off as well as she could , and picked off the feathers from her son , and washed him clean , and put fresh clothes on him . so at last they were to have the wedding , but first matt was to go to the town and sell a cow to buy things for the bridal .
the goody had told him what he was to do , and the beginning and end of what she said was , he was to be sure to get something for the cow .
so when he got to the market with the cow , and they asked what he was to have for her , they could get no other answer out of him than that he was to have something for her .
so at last came a butcher , who begged him to take the cow and follow him home , and he ' d be sure to give him something for her .
yes , matt went off with the cow , and when he got to the butcher ' s house the butcher spat into the palm of matt ' s hand , and said --' there , you have something for your cow , but look sharp after it .
' so off went matt as carefully as if he trode on eggs , holding his hand shut ; but when he had got about as far as the cross - road , which led to their farm , he met the parson , who came driving along .
' open the gate for me , my lad ,' said the parson . so the lad hastened to open the gate , but in doing so he forgot what he had in his palm , and took the gate by both hands , so that what he got for the cow was left sticking on the gate .
so when he saw it was gone he got cross , and said , his reverence had taken something from him . but when the parson asked him if he had lost his wits , and said he had taken nothing from him , matt got so wrath he killed the parson at a blow , and buried him in a bog by the wayside . so when he got home he told his mother all about it , and she slaughtered a billy - goat , and laid it where matt had laid the parson , but she buried the parson in another place .
and when she had done that she hung over the fire a pot of brose , and when it was cooked she made matt sit down in the ingle and split matches .
meantime she went up on the roof with the pot and poured the brose down the chimney , so that it streamed over her son . next day came the sheriff .
so when the sheriff asked him , matt did not gainsay that he had slain the parson , and more , he was quite ready to show the sheriff where he had laid ' his reverence .'
but when the sheriff asked on what day it happened , matt said ' it was the day when it rained brose over the whole world .
' so when he got to the spot where he had buried the parson the sheriff pulled out the billy - goat , and asked --' had your parson horns ?
' now when the judges heard the story , they made up their minds that the lad was quite out of his wits , and so he got off scot free . so after all the bridal was to stand , and the goody had a long talk with her son , and bade him be sure to behave prettily when they sat at table .
he was not to look too much at the bride , but to cast an eye at her now and then .
peas he might eat by himself , but he must share the eggs with her , and he was not to lay the leg bones by his side on the table , but to place them tidily on his plate . yes , matt would do all that , and he did it well ; yes , he did all that his mother bade him , and nothing else .
first , he stole out to the sheepfold , and plucked the eyes out of all the sheep and goats he could find , and took them with him .
so when they went to dinner he sat with his back to his bride ; but all at once he cast a sheep ' s eye at her so that it hit her full in her face ; and a little while after he cast another , and so he went on .
as for the eggs he ate them all up to his own cheek , so that the lassie did not get a taste , but when the peas came he shared them with her .
and when they had eaten a while matt put his feet together , and up on his plate went his legs . at night , when they were to go to bed , the lassie was tired and weary , for she thought it no good to have such a fool for her husband .
so she said she had forgotten something and must go out a little ; but she could not get matt ' s leave ; he would follow her , for to tell the truth , he was afraid she would never come back .' no !
no !
lie still , i say ,' said the bride .
' see , here ' s a long hair - rope ; tie it round me , and i ' ll leave the door ajar .
so if you think i ' m too long away you have only to pull the rope and then you ' ll drag me in again .
' yes , matt was content with that ; but as soon as the lassie got out into the yard she caught a billy - goat and untied the rope and tied it round him . so when matt thought she was too long out of doors he began to haul in the rope , and so he dragged the billy - goat up into bed to him .
but when he had lain a while , he bawled out --' mother !
mother !
my bride has horns like a billy - goat !'' stuff !
silly boy to lie and bewail yourself ,' said his mother .
' it ' s only her hair - plaits , poor thing , i ' m sure .
' in a little while matt called out again --' mother !
mother !
my bride has a beard like a goat .'' stuff !
silly boy to lie there and rave ,' said the goody . but there was no rest in that house that night , for in a little while matt screeched out that his bride was like a billy - goat all over .
so when it grew towards morning the goody said --' jump up , my son , and make a fire .
' so matt climbed up to a shelf under the roof , and set fire to some straw and chips , and other rubbish that lay there .
but then such a smoke rose , that he couldn ' t bear it any longer indoors .
he was forced to go out , and just then the day broke .
as for the goody , she too had to make a start of it , and when they got out the house was on fire , so that the flames came right out at the roof .
' good luck !
good luck !
hip , hip , hurrah !'
roared out matt , for he thought it fine fun to have such an ending to his bridal feast .
