once on a time there was a fell - mouse and a town - mouse , and they met on a hill brae , where the fell - mouse sat in a hazel thicket and plucked nuts .
' god help you , sister ,' said the town - mouse .
' do i meet my kinsfolk here so far out in the country ?'' yes !
so it is ;' said the fell - mouse .
' you gather these nuts and carry them to your house ?'
said the town - mouse .
' yes ; i must do it ,' said the fell - mouse , ' if we are to have anything to live on .
'' the husks are long and the kernels full this year ,' said the town - mouse ; ' so i dare say they will help to fill out a starveling body .
'' you are quite right ,' said the fell - mouse , and then she told her how well and happily she lived .
but the town - mouse thought she was better off , and the fell - mouse would not give in , but said there was no place so good as wood and fell , and as for herself , she had far the best of it . still the town - mouse said she was sure she had the best of it , and they could not agree at all .
so , at last , they promised to pay one another a visit at yule , that they might taste and see which lived best .
the town - mouse was the one that had to pay the first visit , and she went through woods and deep dales , for though the fell - mouse had come down to the lowlands for the winter , the road was both long and heavy .
it was up - hill work , and the snow was both deep and soft , so that she was both weary and hungry by the time she got to her journey ' s end .
' now i shall be glad to get some food ,' she said , when she got there .
as for the fell - mouse , she had scraped together all sorts of good things .
there were kernels of nuts , and liquorish - root and other roots , and much else that grows in wood and field .
all this she had in a hole deep under ground where it would not freeze , and close by was a spring which was open all the winter , so that she could drink as much water as she chose .
there was plenty of what was to be had , and they fed both well and good ; but the town - mouse thought it was not more than sorry fare .
' one can keep life together with this ,' she said ; ' but it isn ' t choice , not at all .
but now you must be so kind as come to me , and taste what we have in town .
' well , the fell - mouse was willing , and it was not long before she came .
then the town - mouse had gathered together something of all the christmas fare which the mistress of the house had dropped as she went about , when she had taken a drop too much at yule .
there were bits of cheese , and odds and ends of butter and tallow , and cheesecakes and tipsycake , and much else that was nice .
in the jar under the ale - tap she had drink enough , and the whole room was full of all kinds of dainties .
they fed and lived well , and there was no end to the fell - mouse ' s greediness .
such fare she had never tasted .
at last , she got thirsty , for the food was both strong and rich , and now she must have a drink of water .
' it is not far off to the ale ,' said the town - mouse ; ' that ' s the drink for us ;' and with that she jumped up on the edge of the jar , and drank her thirst out , but she drank no more than she could carry , for she knew the yule ale and how strong it was .
but as for the fell - mouse , she thought it famous drink , for she had never tasted anything but water , and now she took sip after sip ; but she was no judge of strong drink , and so the end was she got drunk , for she tumbled down and got wild in her head , and felt her feet tingle , till she began to run and to jump about from one beer - barrel to the other , and to dance and cut capers on the shelves among the cups and jugs , and to whistle and whine , just as though she were tipsy and silly ; and tipsy she was , there was no gainsaying it .
' you mustn ' t behave as though you had just come from the hills ,' said the town - mouse .
' don ' t make such a noise , and don ' t lead us such a life ; we have a hard master here .
' but the fell - mouse said : ' she cared not a pin for man or master !
' but all this while the cat sat up on the trap - door above the cellar , and listened and spied both to their talk and pranks .
just then , the goody came down to draw a mug of ale , and as she lifted the trap - door , the cat stole into the cellar and fixed her claws into the fell - mouse .
then there was another dance .
the town - mouse crept into her hole , and sat safe looking on , but the fell - mouse got sober all at once as soon as she felt the cat ' s claws .
' oh , my dear master , my dear master ; be merciful and spare my life , and i ' ll tell you a story .'
that was what she said .
' out with it then ,' said the cat .
' once on a time there were two small mice ,' said the fell - mouse ; and she squeaked so pitifully and slowly , for she wanted to drag the story out as long as she could .
' then they were not alone ,' said the cat , both sharply and drily .
' and so we had a steak we were going to cook .
'' then you were not starved ,' said the cat .
' so we put it up on the roof that it might cool itself well ,' said the fell - mouse .
' then you didn ' t burn your tongues ,' said the cat .
' so , then the fox and the crow came and gobbled it up ,' said the fell - mouse .
' and so i ' ll gobble you up ,' said the cat . but just then the goody slammed to the trap - door again , so that the cat got afraid and loosed her hold , and -- pop -- the fell - mouse was away in the town - mouse ' s hole , and from it there was a way out into the snow , and the fell - mouse was not slow in setting off home .
' this you call living well , and you say that you live best ?'
she said to the town - mouse .
' heaven help me to a better mind , for with such a big house , and such a hawk for a master i could scarce get off with my life .
