" once on a time there was a cottager who had an only son , and this lad was weakly , and hadn ' t much health to speak of ; so he couldn ' t go out to work in the field .
" his name was freddy , and undersized he was , too ; and so they called him little freddy .
at home there was little either to bite or sup , and so his father went about the country trying to bind him over as a cowherd or an errand - boy ; but there was no one who would take his son till he came to the sheriff , and he was ready to take him , for he had just packed off his errand - boy , and there was no one who would fill his place , for the story went that he was a skinflint .
" but the cottager thought it was better there than nowhere : he would get his food , for all the pay he was to get was his board -- there was nothing said about wages or clothes .
so when the lad had served three years he wanted to leave , and then the sheriff gave him all his wages at one time .
he was to have a penny a year .
' it couldn ' t well be less ,' said the sheriff .
and so he got threepence in all .
" as for little freddy , he thought it was a great sum , for he had never owned so much ; but for all that he asked if he wasn ' t to have something more .
"' you have already had more than you ought to have ,' said the sheriff .
"' sha ' n ' t i have anything , then , for clothes ?'
asked little freddy ; ' for those i had on when i came here are worn to rags , and i have had no new ones .
'" and , to tell the truth , he was so ragged that the tatters hung and flapped about him .
"' when you have got what we agreed on ,' said the sheriff , ' and three whole pennies beside , i have nothing more to do with you .
be off !
'" but for all that he got leave just to go into the kitchen and get a little food to put in his scrip ; and after that he set off on the road to buy himself more clothes .
he was both merry and glad , for he had never seen a penny before ; and every now and then he felt in his pockets as he went along to see if he had them all three .
so when he had gone far , and farther than far , he got into a narrow dale , with high fells on all sides , so that he couldn ' t tell if there were any way to pass out ; and he began to wonder what there could be on the other side of those fells , and how he ever should get over them .
" but up and up he had to go , and on he strode ; he was not strong on his legs , and had to rest every now and then -- and then he counted and counted how many pennies he had got .
so when he had got quite up to the very top , there was nothing but a great plain overgrown with moss .
there he sat him down , and began to see if his money were all right ; and before he was aware of him a beggarman came up to him -- and he was so tall and big that the lad began to scream and screech when he got a good look of him , and saw his height and length .
"' don ' t you be afraid ,' said the beggarman , ' i ' ll do you no harm ; i only beg for a penny , in god ' s name .
'"' heaven help me !'
said the lad .
' i have only three pennies , and with them i was going to the town to buy clothes .
'"' it is worse for me than for you ,' said the beggarman .
"' i have got no penny , and i am still more ragged than you .'"' well !
then you shall have it ,' said the lad .
" so when he had walked on awhile he got weary , and sat down to rest again .
but when he looked up there he saw another beggarman , and he was still taller and uglier than the first ; and so when the lad saw how very tall and ugly and long he was he fell a - screeching .
"' now , don ' t you be afraid of me ,' said the beggar ; ' i ' ll not do you any harm .
i only beg for a penny , in god ' s name .
'"' now , may heaven help me !'
said the lad .
' i ' ve only got two pence , and with them i was going to the town to buy clothes .
if i had only met you sooner , then ----'"' it ' s worse for me than for you ,' said the beggarman .
i have no penny , and a bigger body and less clothing .
'"' well , you may have it ,' said the lad .
" so he went awhile farther , till he got weary , and then he sat down to rest ; but he had scarce sat down than a third beggarman came to him .
he was so tall and ugly and long , that the lad had to look up and up , right up to the sky .
and when he took him all in with his eyes , and saw how very , very tall and ugly and ragged he was he fell a - screeching and screaming again .
"' now , don ' t you be afraid of me , my lad ,' said the beggarman .
' i ' ll do you no harm ; for i am only a beggarman , who begs for a penny in god ' s name .
'"' may heaven help me !'
said the lad .
' i have only one penny left , and with it i was going to the town to buy clothes .
if i had only met you sooner , then ----'"' as for that ,' said the beggarman , ' i have no penny at all -- that i haven ' t , and a bigger body and less clothes , so it is worse for me than for you .'"' yes !'
said little freddy , he must have the penny then -- there was no help for it ; for so each would have what belonged to him , and he would have nothing ."' well !'
said the beggarman , ' since you have such a good heart that you gave away all that you had in the world , i will give you a wish for each penny .'
for you must know it was the same beggarman who had got them all three ; he had only changed his shape each time , that the lad might not know him again .
"' i have always had such a longing to hear a fiddle go , and see folk so glad and merry that they couldn ' t help dancing ,' said the lad ; and so , if i may wish what i choose , i will wish myself such a fiddle , that everything that has life must dance to its tune .
'"' that he might have ,' said the beggarman ; but it was a sorry wish .
' you must wish something better for the other two pennies .
'"' i have always had such a love for hunting and shooting ,' said little freddy ; ' so if i may wish what i choose , i will wish myself such a gun that i shall hit everything i aim at , were it ever so far off .
'"' that he might have ,' said the beggarman ; ' but it was a sorry wish .
you must wish better for the last penny .
'"' i have always had a longing to be in company with folk who were kind and good ,' said little freddy ; and so , if i could get what i wish , i would wish it to be so that no one can say ' nay ' to the first thing i ask .
'"' that wish was not so sorry ,' said the beggarman ; and off he strode between the hills , and he saw him no more .
and so the lad laid down to sleep , and the next day he came down from the fell with his fiddle and his gun .
" first he went to the storekeeper and asked for clothes , and at one farm he asked for a horse , and at another for a sledge ; and at this place he asked for a fur - coat , and no one said him ' nay ,'-- even the stingiest folk , they were all forced to give him what he asked for .
at last he went through the country as a fine gentleman , and had his horse and his sledge ; and so when he had gone a bit he met the sheriff with whom he had served .
"' good - day , master ,' said little freddy , as he pulled up and took off his hat .
"' good - day ,' said the sheriff .
and then he went on , ' when was i ever your master ?
'"' oh , yes !'
said little freddy .
' don ' t you remember how i served you three years for three pence ?
'"' heaven help us !'
said the sheriff .
' how you have got on all of a hurry !
and pray how was it that you got to be such a fine gentleman ?
'"' oh , that ' s telling !'
said little freddy .
"' and are you full of fun , that you carry a fiddle about with you ?'
asked the sheriff ."' yes !
yes !'
said freddy .
' i have always had such a longing to get folk to dance ; but the funniest thing of all is this gun , for it brings down almost anything that i aim at , however far it may be off .
do you see that magpie yonder , sitting in the spruce fir ?
what ' ll you bet i don ' t bag it , as we stand here ?
'" on that the sheriff was ready to stake horse and groom , and a hundred dollars beside , that he couldn ' t do it ; but , as it was , he would bet all the money he had about him ; and he would go to fetch it when it fell -- for he never thought it possible for any gun to carry so far .
" but as the gun went off down fell the magpie , and into a great bramble thicket ; and away went the sheriff up into the brambles after it , and he picked it up and showed it to the lad .
but in a trice little freddy began to scrape his fiddle , and the sheriff began to dance , and the thorns to tear him ; but still the lad played on , and the sheriff danced , and cried , and begged till his clothes flew to tatters , and he scarce had a thread to his back ."' yes !'
said little freddy ; ' now i think you ' re about as ragged as i was when i left your service .
so now you may get off with what you have got .
'" but , first of all , the sheriff had to pay him what he had wagered that he could not hit the magpie .
" so when the lad came to the town he turned aside into an inn , and he began to play , and all who came danced , and he lived merrily and well .
he had no care , for no one could say him ' nay ' to anything he asked .
" but just as they were all in the midst of their fun up came the watchmen to drag the lad off to the town - hall : for the sheriff had laid a charge against him , and said he had waylaid him and robbed him , and nearly taken his life .
and now he was to be hanged -- they would not hear of anything else .
but little freddy had a cure for all trouble , and that was his fiddle .
he began to play on it , and the watchmen fell a - dancing , till they lay down and gasped for breath .
" so they sent soldiers and the guard on their way ; but it was no better with them than with the watchmen .
as soon as ever little freddy scraped his fiddle , they were all bound to dance , so long as he could lift a finger to play a tune ; but they were half dead long before he was tired .
at last they stole a march on him , and took him while he lay asleep by night ; and when they had caught him he was doomed to be hanged on the spot , and away they hurried him to the gallows - tree .
" there a great crowd of people flocked together to see this wonder , and the sheriff , he , too , was there ; and he was so glad at last at getting amends for the money and the skin he had lost , and that he might see him hanged with his own eyes .
but they did not get him to the gallows very fast , for little freddy was always weak on his legs , and now he made himself weaker still .
his fiddle and his gun he had with him also -- it was hard to part him from them ; and so , when he came to the gallows , and had to mount the steps , he halted on each step ; and when he got to the top he sat down , and asked if they could deny him a wish , and if he might have leave to do one thing ?
he had such a longing , he said to scrape a tune and play a bar on his fiddle before they hanged him ."' no !
no !'
they said .
' it were sin and shame to deny him that .'
for , you know , no one could gainsay what he asked .
" but the sheriff he begged them , for god ' s sake , not to let him have leave to touch a string , else it was all over with them altogether ; and if the lad got leave , he begged them to bind him to the birch that stood there .
" so little freddy was not slow in getting his fiddle to speak , and all that were there fell a - dancing at once -- those who went on two legs , and those who went on four ; both the dean and the parson , and the lawyer , and the bailiff , and the sheriff ; masters and men , dogs and swine , they all danced and laughed and screeched at one another .
some danced till they lay for dead ; some danced till they fell into a swoon .
it went badly with all of them , but worst of all with the sheriff , for there he stood bound to the birch , and he danced and scraped great bits off his back against the trunk .
there was not one of them who thought of doing anything to little freddy , and away he went with his fiddle and his gun , just as he chose ; and he lived merrily and happily all his days , for there was no one who could say him ' nay ' to the first thing he asked for ."
