once on a time there was a sheep who stood in the pen to be fattened ; so he lived well , and was stuffed and crammed with everything that was good .
so it went on , till , one day , the dairymaid came and gave him still more food , and then she said ,' eat away , sheep ; you won ' t be much longer here ; we are going to kill you to - morrow .
' it is an old saying , that women ' s counsel is always worth having , and that there is a cure and physic for everything but death .
' but , after all ,' said the sheep to himself , ' there may be a cure even for death this time .
' so he ate till he was ready to burst ; and when he was crammed full , he butted out the door of the pen , and took his way to the neighbouring farm .
there he went to the pigsty to a pig whom he had known out on the common , and ever since had been the best friends with .
' good day !'
said the sheep , ' and thanks for our last merry meeting .
'' good day !'
answered the pig , ' and the same to you .
'' do you know ,' said the sheep , ' why it is you are so well off , and why it is they fatten you and take such pains with you ?
'' no , i don ' t ,' said the pig .
' many a flask empties the cask ; i suppose you know that ,' said the sheep .
' they are going to kill and eat you .
'' are they ?'
said the pig ; ' well , i hope they ' ll say grace after meat .
'' if you will do as i do ,' said the sheep , ' we ' ll go off to the wood , build us a house , and set up for ourselves .
a home is a home be it ever so homely .' yes !
the pig was willing enough .
' good company is such a comfort ,' he said , and so the two set off . so , when they had gone a bit they met a goose .
' good day , good sirs , and thanks for our last merry meeting ,' said the goose ; ' whither away so fast to - day ?
'' good day , and the same to you ,' said the sheep ; ' you must know we were too well off at home , and so we are going to set up for ourselves in the wood , for you know every man ' s house is his castle .'' well !'
said the goose , ' it ' s much the same with me where i am .
can ' t i go with you too , for it ' s child ' s play when three share the day .
'' with gossip and gabble is built neither house nor stable ,' said the pig , ' let us know what you can do .
'' by cunning and skill a cripple can do what he will ,' said the goose .
' i can pluck moss and stuff it into the seams of the planks , and your house will be tight and warm .' yes !
they would give him leave , for , above all things piggy wished to be warm and comfortable . so , when they had gone a bit farther -- the goose had hard work to walk so fast -- they met a hare , who came frisking out of the wood .
' good day , good sirs , and thanks for our last merry meeting ,' she said , ' how far are you trotting to - day ?
'' good day , and the same to you ,' said the sheep ; ' we were far too well off at home , and so we ' re going to the wood , to build us a house , and set up for ourselves , for you know , try all the world round , there ' s nothing like home .
'' as for that ,' said the hare , ' i have a house in every bush -- yes , a house in every bush ; but , yet , i have often said , in winter , ' if i only live till summer , i ' ll build me a house ;' and so i have half a mind to go with you and build one up , after all .'' yes !'
said the pig , ' if we ever get into a scrape , we might use you to scare away the dogs , for you don ' t fancy you could help us in house building .
'' he who lives long enough always finds work enough to do ,' said the hare .
' i have teeth to gnaw pegs , and paws to drive them into the wall , so i can very well set up to be a carpenter , for " good tools make good work ," as the man said , when he flayed the mare with a gimlet .' yes !
he too got leave to go with them and build their house , there was nothing more to be said about it . when they had gone a bit farther they met a cock .
' good day , good sirs ,' said the cock , ' and thanks for our last merry meeting ; whither are ye going to - day , gentlemen ?
'' good day , and the same to you ,' said the sheep .
' at home we were too well off , and so we are going off to the wood to build us a house , and set up for ourselves ; for he who out of doors shall bake , loses at last both coal and cake .'' well !'
said the cock , ' that ' s just my case ; but it ' s better to sit on one ' s own perch , for then one can never be left in the lurch , and , besides , all cocks crow loudest at home .
now , if i might have leave to join such a gallant company , i also would like to go to the wood and build a house .'' ay !
ay !'
said the pig , ' flapping and crowing sets tongues a - going ; but a jaw on a stick never yet laid a brick .
how can you ever help us to build a house ?'' oh !'
said the cock , ' that house will never have a clock , where there is neither dog nor cock .
i am up early , and i wake every one .
'' very true ,' said the pig , ' the morning hour has a golden dower ; let him come with us ;' for , you must know , piggy was always the soundest sleeper .
' sleep is the biggest thief ,' he said ; ' he thinks nothing of stealing half one ' s life .
' so they all set off to the wood , as a band and brotherhood , and built the house .
the pig hewed the timber , and the sheep drew it home ; the hare was carpenter , and gnawed pegs and bolts , and hammered them into the walls and roof ; the goose plucked moss and stuffed it into the seams ; the cock crew , and looked out that they did not oversleep themselves in the morning ; and when the house was ready , and the roof lined with birch bark , and thatched with turf ; there they lived by themselves , and were merry and well .
'' tis good to travel east and west ,' said the sheep , ' but after all a home is best .
' but you must know that a bit farther on in the wood was a wolf ' s den , and there lived two graylegs .
so when they saw that a new house had risen up hard by , they wanted to know what sort of folk their neighbours were , for they thought to themselves that a good neighbour was better than a brother in a foreign land , and that it was better to live in a good neighbourhood than to know many people miles and miles off . so one of them made up an errand , and went into the new house and asked for a light for his pipe .
but as soon as ever he got inside the door , the sheep gave him such a butt that he fell head foremost into the stove .
then the pig began to gore and bite him , the goose to nip and peck him , the cock upon the roost to crow and chatter ; and as for the hare he was so frightened out of his wits , that he ran about aloft and on the floor , and scratched and scrambled in every corner of the house . so after a long time the wolf came out .' well !'
said the one who waited for him outside , ' neighbourhood makes brotherhood .
you must have come into a perfect paradise on bare earth , since you stayed so long .
but what became of the light , for you have neither pipe nor smoke .
'' yes , yes !'
said the other ; ' it was just a nice light and a pleasant company .
such manners i never saw in all my life .
but then you know we can ' t pick and choose in this wicked world , and an unbidden guest gets bad treatment .
as soon as i got inside the door , the shoe - maker let fly at me with his last , so that i fell head foremost into the stithy fire ; and there sat two smiths who blew the bellows and made the sparks fly , and beat and punched me with red hot tongs and pincers , so that they tore whole pieces out of my body .
as for the hunter he went scrambling about looking for his gun , and it was good luck he did not find it .
and all the while there was another who sat up under the roof , and slapped his arms and sang out ,' put a hook into him , and drag him hither , drag him hither .'
that was what he screamed , and if he had only got hold of me , i should never have come out alive .
