once on a time there was a man , and he had a wife ; they had a son and a daughter who were twins , and they were so like , no one could tell the one from the other by anything else than their clothing .
the boy they called peik .
he was of little good while his father and mother lived , for he had no mood to do aught else than to befool folk , and he was so full of tricks and pranks that no one could be at peace for him ; but when they were dead it got worse and worse , he wouldn ' t turn his hand to anything ; all he would do was to squander what they left behind them , and as for his neighbours he fell out with all of them .
his sister toiled and moiled all she could , but it helped little ; so at last she said to him how silly this was that he would do naught for her house , and ended by asking him ,' what shall we have to live on when you have wasted everything ?
'' oh , i ' ll go out and befool somebody ,' said peik .
' yes , peik , i ' ll be bound you ' ll do that soon enough ,' said his sister .
' well , i ' ll try ,' said peik . so at last they had nothing more , for there was an end of everything ; and peik trotted off , and walked and walked till he came to the king ' s grange .
there stood the king in the porch , and as soon as he set eyes on the lad , he said ,--' whither away to - day , peik ?
'' oh , i was going out to see if i could befool anybody ,' said peik .
' can ' t you befool me , now ?'
said the king .
' no , i ' m sure i can ' t ,' said peik , ' for i ' ve forgotten my fooling rods at home .
'' can ' t you go and fetch them ?'
said the king , ' for i should be very glad to see if you are such a trickster as folks say .
'' i ' ve no strength to walk ,' said peik .
' i ' ll lend you a horse and saddle ,' said the king .
' but i can ' t ride either ,' said peik .
' then we ' ll lift you up ,' said the king , ' then you ' ll be able to stick on .
' well , peik stood and clawed and scratched his head , as though he would pull the hair off , and let them lift him up into the saddle , and there he sat swinging this side and that so long as the king could see him , and the king laughed till the tears came into his eyes , for such a tailor on horseback he had never before seen .
but when peik was come well into the wood behind the hill , so that he was out of the king ' s sight , he sat as though he were nailed to the horse , and off he rode as though he had stolen both steed and bridle , and when he got to the town , he sold both horse and saddle . all the while the king walked up and down , and loitered and waited for peik to come tottering back again with his fooling rods ; and every now and then he laughed when he called to mind how wretched he looked as he sat swinging about on the horse like a sack of corn , not knowing on which side to fall off ; but this lasted for seven lengths and seven breadths , and no peik came , and so at last the king saw that he was fooled and cheated out of his horse and saddle , even though peik had not his fooling rods with him .
and so there was another story , for the king got wroth , and was all for setting off to kill peik . but peik had found out the day he was coming , and told his sister she must put on the big boiler with a drop of water in it .
but just as the king came in peik dragged the boiler off the fire and ran off with it to the chopping - block , and so boiled the porridge on the block . the king wondered at that , and wondered on and on so much that he clean forgot what brought him there .
' what do you want for that pot ?'
said he .
' i can ' t spare it ,' said peik .
' why not ?'
said the king , ' i ' ll pay what you ask .
'' no , no !'
said peik .
' it saves me time and money , woodhire and choppinghire , carting and carrying .
'' never mind ,' said the king , ' i ' ll give you a hundred dollars .
it ' s true you ' ve fooled me out of a horse and saddle , and bridle besides , but all that shall go for nothing if i can only get the pot .'' well !
if you must have it you must ,' said peik . when the king got home he asked guests and made a feast , but the meat was to be boiled in the new pot , and so he took it up and set it in the middle of the floor .
the guests thought the king had lost his wits , and went about elbowing one another , and laughing at him .
but he walked round and round the pot , and cackled and chattered , saying all in a breath --' well , well !
bide a bit , bide a bit !
' twill boil in a minute .
' but there was no boiling .
so he saw that peik had been out again with his fooling rods and cheated him , and now he would set off at once and slay him . when the king came peik stood out by the barn door .
' wouldn ' t it boil ?'
he asked .' no !
it would not ,' said the king ; ' but now you shall smart for it ,' and so he was just going to unsheath his knife .
' i can well believe that ,' said peik , ' for you did not take the block too .
'' i wish i thought ,' said the king , ' you weren ' t telling me a pack of lies .
'' i tell you it ' s all because of the block it stands on ; it won ' t boil without it ,' said peik .
' well ; what did he want for it ?'
it was well worth three hundred dollars ; but for the king ' s sake it should go for two .
so he got the block and travelled home with it , and bade guests again , and made a feast , and set the pot on the chopping - block in the middle of the room .
the guests thought he was both daft and mad , and they went about making game of him , while he cackled and chattered round the pot , calling out ' bide a bit , now it boils !
now it boils in a trice .
' but it wouldn ' t boil a bit more on the block than on the bare floor .
so he saw again that peik had been out with his fooling rods this time too .
then he fell a - tearing his hair , and swore he would set off at once and slay him .
he wouldn ' t spare him this time , whether he put a good or a bad face on it . but peik had taken steps to meet him again .
he slaughtered a wether and caught the blood in the bladder , and stuffed it into his sister ' s bosom , and told her what to say and do .
' where ' s peik !'
screeched out the king .
he was in such a rage that his tongue faltered . he is so poorly that he can ' t stir hand or foot ,' she said , ' and now he ' s trying to get a nap .
'' wake him up ,' said the king .
' nay , i daren ' t ; he is so hasty ,' said the sister .' well !
i ' m hastier still ,' said the king , ' and if you don ' t wake him , i will ,' and with that he tapped his side where his knife hung . well !
she would go and wake him ; but peik turned hastily in his bed , drew out a little knife , and ripped open the bladder in her bosom , so that a stream of blood gushed out , and down she fell on the floor , as though she were dead .
' what a dare devil you are , peik ,' said the king , ' if you haven ' t stabbed your sister to death , and here i stood by and saw it with my own eyes .
'' there ' s no risk with her body so long as there ' s breath in my nostrils ;' and with that he pulled out a ramshorn , and began to toot upon it , and when he had tooted a bridal tune , he put the end to her body , and blew life into her again , and up she rose as though there was naught the matter with her .
' bless me , peik !
can you kill folk and blow life into them again ?
can you do that ?'
said the king .' why !'
said peik , ' how could i get on at all if i couldn ' t ?
i ' m always killing everyone i come near ; don ' t you know i ' m very hasty .'
' so am i hot - tempered ,' said the king , ' and that horn i must have ; i ' ll give you a hundred dollars for it , and besides i ' ll forgive you for cheating me out of my horse , and for fooling me about the pot and the block , and all else .
' peik was very loth to part with it , but for his sake he would let him have it , and so the king went off home with it , and he had hardly got back before he must try it .
so he fell a - wrangling and quarrelling with the queen and his eldest daughter , and they paid him back in the same coin ; but before they knew a word about it he whipped out his knife and cut their throats , so that they fell down stone dead , and everyone else ran out of the room , they were so afraid . the king walked and paced about the floor for a while , and kept chattering that there was no harm done , so long as there was breath in him , and a pack of such stuff which had flowed out of peik ' s mouth , and then he pulled out the horn and began to blow ' toot - i - too , toot - i - too ,' but though he blew and tooted as hard as he could all that day and the next too , he couldn ' t blow life into them again .
dead they were , and dead they stayed , both the queen and his daughter , and he was forced to buy graves for them in the churchyard , and to spend money on their funeral ale into the bargain . so he must and would go and cut peik off ; but peik had his spies out , and knew when the king was coming , and then he said to his sister ,--' now you must change clothes with me and set off .
if you will do that you may have all we have got .' well !
she changed clothes with him , and packed up and started off as fast as she could ; but peik sat all alone in his sister ' s clothes .
' where is that peik ?'
said the king , as he came in a towering rage through the door .
' he has run away ,' said peik .' ah !
had he been at home ,' said the king , ' i ' d have slain him on the spot .
it ' s no good sparing the life of such a rogue .'' yes !
he knew by his spies that your majesty was coming , and was going to take his life for his wicked tricks ; but he has left me all alone without a morsel of bread or a penny in my purse ,' said peik , who made himself as soft and mealy - mouthed as a young lady .
' come along then to the king ' s grange , and you shall have enough to live on .
there ' s no good sitting here and starving in this cabin by yourself ,' said the king . yes !
he was glad to do that ; so the king took him with him , and had him taught everything , and treated him as his own daughter , and it was almost as if the king had his three daughters again , for miss peik sewed and stitched , and sung and played with the others , and was with them early and late . after a time a king ' s son came to look for a wife .' yes !
i have three daughters ,' said the king ; ' it rests with you which you will have ?
' so he got leave to go up to their bower to make friends with them , and the end was that he liked miss peik best , and threw a silk kerchief into her lap as a love token .
so they set to work to get ready the bridal feast , and in a little while his kinsfolk came , and the king ' s men , and they all fell to feasting and drinking on the bridal eve ; but as night was falling miss peik daren ' t stay longer , but ran away from the king ' s grange , out into the wide world , and the bride was lost ; but there was worse behind , for just then both the other princesses felt very queer , and all at once two little princes came travelling into the world , and folk had to break up and go home just as the fun and feasting were highest .
the king got both wroth and sorrowful , and began to wonder if it wasn ' t peik again that had a finger in this pie . so he mounted his horse and rode out , for he thought it dull work staying at home ; but when he got out among the ploughed fields , there sat peik on a stone playing on a jews ' harp .' what !
are you sitting there , peik ?'
said the king .
' here i sit , sure enough ,' said peik .
' where else should i sit ?
"' now you have cheated me foully , time after time ,' said the king ; ' but now you must come along home with me , and i ' ll kill you .
'' well , well ,' said peik , ' if it can ' t be helped it can ' t ; i suppose i must go along with you .
' when they got home to the king ' s grange , they got ready a cask which peik was to be put in , and when it was ready they carted it up to a high fell ; there he was to lie three days thinking on all the evil he had done , then they were to roll him down the fell into the firth . the third day a rich man passed by , but peik sat inside the cask and sang ,--' to heaven ' s bliss and paradise , to heaven ' s bliss and paradise .
' i ' d sooner far stay here and not be made an angel .
' when the man heard that , he asked what he would take to change places with him .
' it ought to be a good sum ,' said peik , ' for there wasn ' t a coach ready to start for paradise every day .
' so the man said he would give all he had , and so he knocked out the head of the cask and crept into it instead of peik .
' a happy journey ,' said the king , when he came to roll him down ; ' now you ' ll go faster to the firth than if you were in a sledge with reindeer ; and now it ' s all over with you and your fooling rods .
' before the cask was half - way down the fell , there wasn ' t a whole stave of it left , nor a limb of him who was inside .
but when the king came back to the grange , peik was there before him , and sat in the courtyard playing on the jews ' harp .' what !
you sitting here , you peik ?'' yes !
here i sit , sure enough ; where else should i sit ?'
said peik .
' maybe i can get house - room here for all my horses and sheep and money .
'' but whither was it that i rolled you that you got all this wealth ?'
asked the king .
' oh , you rolled me into the firth ,' said peik , ' and when i got to the bottom there was more than enough and to spare , both of horses and sheep and of gold and silver .
the cattle went about in great flocks , and the gold and silver lay in large heaps as big as houses .
'' what will you take to roll me down the same way ?'
asked the king .
' oh ,' said peik , ' it costs little or nothing to do it .
besides , you took nothing from me , and so i ' ll take nothing from you either .
' so he stuffed the king into a cask and rolled him over , and when he had given him a ride down to the firth for nothing , he went home to the king ' s grange .
then he began to hold his bridal feast with the youngest princess , and afterwards he ruled both land and realm , but he kept his fooling rods to himself , and kept them so well that nothing was ever afterwards heard of peik and his tricks , but only of ourself the king .
