once five women were reaping in a field .
each of them was childless and wanted a child of her own .
suddenly they came upon a giant goose - egg .
it was as big as a man ' s head .
" i saw it first ," one said .
" i saw it just as soon ," yelled another ." what ?
i mean to have it .
i was the one that first set eyes on it !"
snarled a third . they went on quarrelling over the egg and were quite ready to tear each other ' s hair , but at long last they agreed to keep it all five of them and sit on it like the goose does , to hatch out the gosling .
the first of them sat for a week like a broody goose and had an easy time of it .
she didn ' t have to work while the others toiled to feed themselves and her .
then one of them cursed her for being lazy in a goose ' s way .
" you couldn ' t twitter till you ' d been in the egg a while yourself ," said the one who was brooding .
" but in this egg there ' s something human , i tell you .
it seems to be mumbling " herring and gruel and porridge and milk " over and over again .
now you can sit on it for a week , and the rest of us can feed you in turns .
" after the fifth woman had been sitting there brooding for a week , she could hear beyond doubt that there was s curious creature inside the egg .
it went on shouting for " herring and gruel and porridge and milk ," so she picked a hole in the eggshell .
there burst forth a human child with a big head and a little body .
the infant was as ugly as could be , not anything like a gosling . his first cry was : " herring and gruel and porridge and milk !"
they agreed to call him rumble - mumble goose - egg . he was such an ugly fellow from the start ; they all became fond of him .
but in a very short time he became so hungry that he ate all their food .
again and again when they made porridge and gruel enough for the six of them , the newcomer gulped down all of it .
that ' s why they didn ' t want to keep him any longer .
they said ," that blasted imp !
" rumble - mumble goose - egg overheard their complaints and at once got ready to leave .
if they could do without him , he could do without them , he said .
off he went . he walked far and asked for service on a farm in the pretty country .
it so happened they were in need of a labourer .
the old man who owned the farm , told him to clear stones from the fields .
rumble - mumble picked up the stones well .
he gathered big ones that made up several cart - loads each , and put the whole lot , both big and small , into his pockets .
soon he had finished his job and went back to the farm to find out what to do next .
" clear away the stones form the field ," said the farmer .
" you ' ve hardly begun , young man .
" the tall rumble - mumble goose - egg now emptied his pockets and threw all the stones in a heap , so the farmer could see he had done the work very well .
but from this moment on the farmer felt he ought to watch his step with such a strong man .
he told him he had better come in and have something to eat .
this suited rumble - mumble .
he cleaned up the meal at once .
there was nothing left for anybody else .
and still he wasn ' t more than halfway satisfied . nobody could match him as a worker , but none matched him as an eater either .
feeding him was like pouring water through a sieve .
" a worker like that could eat a poor farmer out of house and home in three shakes of a lamb ' s tail ," muttered the farmer to himself , and then he found no more work for him at all .
it was best that rumble - mumble went to the king ' s farm at once . he did and was taken on .
he found there was food and work enough .
he was to do errands and do odd jobs .
first he could split up a bit of firewood , they said .
rumble - mumble set to work and sent the splinters flying from his chopping and splitting .
he chopped up all the wood there was , timber and wood set aside for planks and tools , and when he had finished he came along and asked what they wanted him to do next .
" finish chopping wood ," they said .
" there isn ' t any more ," said rumble - mumble . the bailiff came along with him and took a look at the woodshed .
rumble - mumble had chopped up even the timber logs .
the bailiff said this was a disgrace , and that rumble - mumble wouldn ' t get a bite to eat till he had been to the woods and felled as much timber as he had split up into firewood . rumble - mumble at once ran down to the forge and had the smith help him make an axe of 250 kilos or so .
off to the forest .
he cut down mast - timber and everything else to be found in the woods of the king and those of his neighbours .
he left the branches on , and the forests looked as though they had been swept down by a whirlwind .
he piled a solid load on the sledge and harnessed all the horses in front .
he tugged at their bridles to get the load moving , and then he pulled all their heads of by accident .
so in the end he was forced to pull the load to the king ' s farm himself . the king and forester were standing in the porch when he arrived .
they wanted to have a word with him about the way he treated woods , for the forester had been along there and seen it all .
but when the king saw rumble - mumble dragging half the forest behind him , he lost his nerve .
he got vexed , alarmed and all at once saw no reason to fall out with such a man .
" you ' re a fit worker ," said the king .
" you ' re hungry now , i bet .
" they set about preparing food .
in the meantime rumble - mumble was to bring in a load of wood for the cook .
he stacked the whole wood - pile on a sledge , and wanted to pull it though the door .
but he was a bit rough again , so that wall timbers were pushed askew , corners slipped out of joint and the whole building nearly fell down . all the same , while this happened , they could manage to make twelve hubs of meal to a portion of porridge for rumble - mumble , and much less for the other men around .
when the dinner was just about ready , they sent him to call in the men .
he shouted so loud that he hills echoed all around as they often do in a thunderstorm , and yet rumble - mumble thought the men were too slow in coming .
he had a quarrel with them and in so doing knocked the life out of twelve . food was served .
and then there was no need to feed him for a while .
" he knocked the life out of twelve ," said the king , " and he eats much more than one hundred and forty - eight men , that is twelve times twelve , i reckon .
how much work do you do , my lad ?
"" much more than twelve times twelve do ," said rumble - mumble . after dinner he was sent to the barn to thresh corn .
he lifted the ridge - pole off the roof to use as a flail , and when the roof started collapsing , he took a giant spruce with all its branches on and put it along the ridge of the roof instead .
and then he threshed grand and straw and hay all together .
it didn ' t turn out well .
both corn and chaff were whirled through the air and spread like a cloud over all the farm . when he had almost got the threshing done , an enemy invaded the country .
so now the king was at war .
he asked rumble - mumble to take some men with him , march against the enemy and meet him in battle , for the king was sure the enemy would kill him . but rumble - mumble would fight alone .
he didn ' t want to have men with him . all the better , thought the king , the sooner i get rid of him . but rumble - mumble had to have a good , solid club .
the smith forged a club that weighed 100 kilos , and rumble - mumble said it was good enough to crack nuts with .
then the smith forged a club of 250 kilos .
rumble - mumble said it was good enough to sole shoes with .
anyhow , the smith said it was the biggest job his men could do .
and so rumble - mumble made a club of 2000 kilos , that is two tons .
it took a hundred men to turn it on the anvil .
he could make do with this new club .
he also had to have a knapsack .
they made it out of fifteen oxhides and packed it with food .
off he tramped with his club on his shoulder . he came to the enemy ' s camp .
they wanted to know if he was ready for battle .
" just wait till i ' ve had a bite to eat ," said rumble - mumble , sat down behind his big knapsack and began his meal . but the enemy wouldn ' t wait , started firing at once , and bullets showered down on him .
but both lead and steel bounced off him , and besides his knapsack gave plenty of cover .
" i can do without all this firing and shooting ," said rumble - mumble . and yet they went on .
they even started throwing grenades and shooting cannonballs .
" there ' s no need to tickle me ," he said each time one touched him .
then he got a grenade stuck in his throat .
" ugh ," he said and spat it out .
next there came a chain - shot that cut through his butter - box , and then another chain - shot carried off a sandwich he was holding in his hand .
" that does it ," he muttered .
angrily he jumped up , seized his big club and drummed it on the ground .
he asked them if they meant to keep on blowing the bread out of his mouth with their pea - shooters .
he beat on the ground so that hills and mountains trembled and the enemy were scattered .
that was the end of that war , for all we know . he returned to the king and asked for more work .
the king grew pale , for he had hoped to get rid of him this time .
the only thing he could think of was to send him to hell .
" go off to old nick ( the devil ) and collect the rent at once ," he said .
off went lonely rumble - mumble with his sack on his back and his dear club on his shoulder .
he made a quick journey out of it , but when he got there , old nick was busy hearing the catechism for confirmation .
none was at home but his mom , and she had never heard of any rent owing .
he had better come back some time later , she suggested .
" no matter what , i ' ll wait till i ' ve got the rent i was sent for ," he insisted . time began to drag after he had had his meal .
that ' s why he called to old nick ' s mom once again .
she had to pay up straight away .
she refused .
she wouldn ' t pay the rent .
then he darted up to the top of a great pine outside the gate of hell , and bent and twisted it lie a willow wand and asked her whether she would pay anyhow . she dared not do otherwise .
in a thrice she found as many coins as he could carry in his sack .
he set off towards the king ' s farm .
no sooner had he left than old nick came back home .
he was soon told what rumble had done , and that he had made off with a big sack of his money , and set out in a big hurry to catch up .
but first he took the time to wallop his own dear mother quite a bit for letting go of all that money . old nick soon drew near to rubmle - mumble .
the devil carried no sack , and could fly through the air when he so chose .
rumle - mumble on the other hand had to keep to the ground with his heavy sack .
but when old nick came hurrying at his heels , he put a spurt on and racked along as fast as he could , brandishing his club to keep him off . they ran on and on , rumble - mumble holding the handle tight and old nick grabbing at the head of the club , till they came to a very deep valley .
there rumble showed himself capable of leaping from mountain top to the other .
old nick flew after him over the valley in such as rush that he dashed foolishly against the club and tumbled down into the valley and broke off his foot .
there he lay .
" here ' s your rent ," said rumble - mumble when he reached the royal farm , and tossed the sack at the king ' s feet .
crash , boom , bang , the whole porch shook . the king at once made a fine speech to thank him , and promised him a rich reward and safe journey home if he so wished .
but rumble - mumble only wanted more work .
he was an honest worker .
" so what do you want me to do next ?"
he asked . the king scratched his neck and then came up with the idea :" go to the big troll that once stole my grandfather ' s sword , the one who lives in a castle by the sea where none has ever dared come near .
" rumble - mumble packed some bundles of food in his knapsack and off he went once more .
he travelled a long , long way over wild hills this time , till he came to some tall , wild - looking rocks .
they were the castle of the troll he was after .
but the troll was nowhere to be seen , the rocks were shut , and rumble - mumble couldn ' t find a way in . he fell in with some quarrymen who were quarrying stone in this district .
he set about to help , and they had never had such help before .
he broke up the mountain - face and split the rocks and sent boulders as big as houses toppling down . when it was time for him to rest and have his dinner , he went to open one of his bundles and found it had all been eaten up by someone .
" that could only be the troll ," rumble - mumble considered , " i have a good appetite myself , but this fellow has eaten all the bones also .
" the first day was soon passed , and on the second the same thing happened ; someone stole his food .
but on the third day rumble - mumble set out to break stones , he took the third bundle with him .
and he was careful to lay down behind it and pretend to be sleeping . the mountain opened while he lay in ambush like that .
suddenly a troll with seven heads came out and started to gobble the food in rumble - mumble ' s bundle .
rumble - mumble rose rather quickly and struck all the eating heads off with one blow of his club .
that was the end of it .
he went inside the mountain through the wide open portals the troll had left .
well inside he found a horse eating from a tub of red - hot embers , and behind it was a tub of oats .
" why not eat the oats ?"
he asked the horse .
" i can ' t turn around .
i ' m bound .
that ' s why ," said the horse .
" i can turn you around ," said rumble - mumble .
" i ' d rather you tore off my head ," said the horse .
" that ' s what the comrade would do .
deeds like these are what a lot comrades are for , you know .
"" is that really so ?"
said rumble - mumble , halfway doubting .
yet he did as he was instructed .
all once the horse became a fair young man .
he told rumble - mumble he had been bewitched and changed into a horse by that ugly monster .
he also helped rumble - mumble to find the sword the troll had hidden at the bottom of the bed .
in that bed the troll ' s own mama lay snoring away . they set off towards the king ' s farm across the sea .
the troll ' s mama awoke a little after that , and found out what had taken place .
she hurried down to the water , but could not catch them .
they were too far away as they sailed off in the only boat around .
in a rage she began drinking the water .
she drank so much that the level of the water sank .
she didn ' t manage to drink up all the ocean , so in the end she burst .
" what else was to be expected ?"
rumble - mumble wondered as he sailed on , " i know a bit of that .
" rumble - mumble sent word to the king as soon as they had landed near his place .
the king could come and get his sword .
he sent four horses , but they could not move it .
he sent eight and then he sent twelve , and still the sword stayed where it was .
they couldn ' t make it stir and move .
rumble - mumble picked it up and carried it along to the king ' s farm himself .
the king couldn ' t believe his eyes when he saw that one again .
but he made a fine speech . after it , rumble - mumble asked for more work .
he was told to go to an enchanted castle where none dared stay .
he was to make his home there till he had built a bridge over the sound nearby , so that people could get across .
the king would reward him well , he said .
he would even give rumble - mumble his own daughter for it . that looked promising , so rumble - mumble agreed to the bargain , although none had ever come back from the enchanted castle alive .
the king was quite certain that this time he had got rid of him .
rumble - mumble set off .
along with his food he took with him a good hard stump of pine , a small axe , a wedge , and some kindling wood and little else from the king ' s farm . he reached the sound .
the river was full of ice , but the feet of rumble - mumble were firm enough for wading there anyway , so he crossed safely to the other side .
he got into the castle at once .
rumble - mumble warmed himself by the fire and had his supper .
he felt ready for a night ' s sleep , but all of a sudden he heard a terrible din .
the whole castle was being turned upside down .
all he could see was a gaping jaw as big as the doorway .
it was the devil in one of his guises . he and rumble - mumble started to play cards , because it mattered to the devil .
he needed to win back some money rumble - mumble had got out of his mom .
yet can you guess who was the winning one ? it so happened that rumble had much luck .
he kept winning for it .
he won all the ready cash at first , and all gold and silver in the spellbound castle later .
it was then that the fire went out .
" we must cut some wood ," said rumble - mumble , who was in luck and needed to see to play .
he didn ' t want to stop .
so he struck the stump of pine with his axe so as to cleave it , but the old log was gnarled and tough .
it wouldn ' t split .
" you ' re supposed to be strong ," he said to the devil .
" dig in your claws .
wrench this log apart !
" the devil got to work as hard as he could .
while he did his best rumble - mumble happened to drive out the wedge so that the devil got caught in a pucker . rumble - mumble understood at once he had an excellent opportunity to try out he head of his axe on the back of the devil and have the time of his life .
the devil begged to get freed , but rumble - mumble refused to listen till the devil had promised he would never come and harry anyone there again ever after .
he also took an oath that he would build the bridge over the sound so that people could cross it safely summer as winter .
the devil ' s great project was to be ready as soon as the ice in the river melted .
" those are hard terms ," said the devil .
anyhow , he had no choice if he wanted to be free .
in the end he wanted no other bargain , no more deals .
and rumble - mumble agreed at last . the devil was set free and sped off and away towards hell - it happened to be his only home .
rumble - mumble went to bed to sleep and was still asleep rather late next day , as the king came along to see if he lay torn to pieces .
instead he saw gold and silver enough to wade in it .
sacks of the stuff lay heaped along walls , and in the bed rumble - mumble lay snoring .
" heaven help me and my daughter ," said the king , readily seeing his mistake : rumble - mumble was alive and kicking .
a wonderful job had he done .
yet the king insisted that there could scarcely be a wedding till after the bridge stood complete . then one day it happened .
the bridge stood all finished , just as the devil had promised on his life .
rumble - mumble wanted to take the king with him to try out the bridge , but the king didn ' t like that new idea .
" oh no , thanks !
i won ' t that !"
the king said .
and to himself he whistled ," this bridge check could easily bring on hateful revenge for my hanky - panky tricks !
" at that very moment he woke up to hear ten little birds start to sing a little off :" let rumble - mumble be , let him be .
then you ' ll see . look at your nose . build a cloister in thosefar - away regionsas soon as you canor bear all the burden ..." none else could understand them , so he grabbed his staff at once and hurried away to one of his very distant cottages in the far - away mountains , where he wanted to settle as a hermit to make amends by building a good cloister . he also allowed the big rumble - mumble to take over and run the farm and country from that blissful moment , for as the king later said in his cottage , " i had the good fortune to wed my daughter to a man with an enormous appetite .
it will bring many blessings .
" snip snap snout , that wedding came about .
