there was once a rich farmer ' s son who went out to woo .
he had heard of a lass who was fair and gentle , and who was both clever in the house and good at cooking . there he went , for it was just such a wife he wanted .
the people on the farm knew , of course , on what errand he came , so they asked him to take a seat near to them , and they talked and chatted with him , as the custom is , and beside offered him a drink and asked him to stop to dinner .
they went in and out of the room , so the lad had time to look about him , and over in a corner he saw a spinning wheel with the distaff full of flax .
" whose spinning wheel is that ?"
asked the lad .
" oh , that ' s our daughter ' s ," said the woman of the house .
" there ' s a deal of flax on it ," said the lad ; " i suppose she takes more than a day to spin that ," said he .
" no , not at all ," said the woman ; " she does it easily in one day and perhaps less than that .
" that was more than he had ever heard of any one being able to spin in such a short time . when they were going to carry in the dinner they all went out of the room and he was left alone .
he then saw an old key lying in the window , and this he took and stowed well away among the flax on the distaff .
so they ate and drank and got on well together , and when the lad thought he had been there long enough he said good - by and went his way .
they asked him to come soon again , which he promised , but he did not speak of the matter he had at heart , although he liked the lass very well . some time after he came again to the farm , and they received him still better than the first time .
but just as they were chatting at their best the farmer ' s wife said :" last time you were here something very remarkable happened ; our storehouse key disappeared all at once and we have never been able to find it since .
" the lad went over to the spinning wheel , which stood in the corner with just as much flax on it as when last he was there .
he put his hand in among the flax and said :" here is the key !
much cannot be made by the spinning when the spinning day lasts from michaelmas to easter .
" so he said good - by , and did not speak of the matter he had at heart that time either .
