once upon a time there was a cook and a hen , who were out in a field scratching and scraping and pecking . all at once the hen found a barleycorn , and the cock found a bur of hops , and so they made up their minds they would make some malt and brew beer for christmas .
" i plucked the barley and i malted the corn and brewed the beer , and the beer is good ," cackled the hen .
" is the wort strong enough ?"
said the cock , and flew up to the edge of the vat to taste it ; but when he stooped down to take a sip he began flapping with his wings and fell on his head into the vat and was drowned . when the hen saw this she was quite beside herself .
she flew onto the hearth and began to scream and cry , " got , got , got , drowned !
got , got , got , drowned !"
and this she went on crying all the time and would not stop .
" what is the matter with you , mother tup , since you are crying and grieving so ?"
asked the hand - quern .
" oh , father tup has fallen into the brewing vat and got drowned and there he lies dead !"
said the hen .
" that ' s the reason i cry and grieve .
"" well , if i can ' t do anything else i will grind and groan ," said the hand - quern , and began grinding as fast as it could . when the stool heard this it said , " what ' s the matter with you , quern , since you groan and grind so fast ?
"" oh , father tup has fallen into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth , crying and grieving ; therefore i grind and groan ," said the hand - quern .
" well , if i can ' t do anything else i shall creak ," said the stool , and began creaking and cracking . this the door heard , so it said , " what ' s the matter with you ?
why are you creaking , stool ?
"" oh , father tup has fallen into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving and the hand - quern is grinding and groaning ; therefore i creak and crack and crackle ," said the stool .
" well , if i can ' t do anything else i ' ll bang and slam and whine and whistle " said the door , and began opening and shutting and slamming and banging till it went through one ' s bones and marrow to hear it . this the dustbin heard .
" why are you slamming and banging like that , door ?"
said the bin .
" oh , father tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving ; the hand - quern is grinding and groaning ; the stool is creaking and cracking ; therefore i keep slamming and banging ," said the door .
" well , if i can ' t do anything else i ' ll fume and smoke ," said the dustbin , and began fuming and smoking and sending the dust up in clouds all over the room . this the hay - rake saw , as it stood peeping in through the window .
" why are you raising the dust like that , dustbin ?"
asked the rake .
" oh , father tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving ; the hand - quern is grinding and groaning ; the stool is creaking and cracking ; the door is slamming and banging ; therefore i keep fuming and smoking ," said the dustbin .
" well , if i can ' t do anything else i ' ll rake and rend ," said the rake , and began rending and raking . this the aspen tree saw as it looked on .
" why do you rend and rake like that , rake ?
said the tree .
" oh , father tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving ; the hand - quern is grinding and groaning ; the stool is creaking and cracking ; the door is slamming and banging ; the dustbin is fuming and smoking ; therefore i keep rending and raking ," said the rake .
" well , if i can ' t do anything else ," said the aspen , " i will quiver and quake .
" this the birds noticed .
" why do you quiver and quake like that ?"
said the birds to the tree .
" oh , father tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving ; the hand - quern is grinding and groaning ; the stool is creaking and cracking ; the door is slamming and banging ; the dustbin is fuming and smoking ; the rake is rending and raking ; therefore i quiver and quake ," said the aspen .
" well , if we can ' t do anything else we will pluck off our feathers ," said the birds , and began pecking and plucking till the feathers flew about the farm like snow . the farmer stood looking on , and when he saw the feathers flying about he asked the birds , " why are you plucking off your feathers like that , birds ?
"" oh , father tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving ; the hand - quern is grinding and groaning ; the stool is creaking and cracking ; the door is slamming and banging ; the dustbin is fuming and smoking ; the rake is rending and raking ; the aspen is quivering and quaking ; therefore we keep pecking and plucking ," said the birds .
" well , if i can ' t do anything else i will pull the besoms to pieces ," said the farmer , and began tugging and pulling the besoms to pieces , so that the twigs flew about , both east and west . his wife was boiling the porridge for supper when she saw this .
" why are you pulling the besoms to pieces , husband ?"
said she .
" oh , father tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned ; mother tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving ; the hand - quern is grinding and groaning ; the stool is creaking and cracking ; the door is slamming and banging ; the dustbin is fuming and smoking ; the rake is rending and raking ; the aspen is quivering and quaking ; the birds are pecking and plucking off their feathers ; therefore i am pulling the besom to pieces ," said the man .
" well , then i ' ll daub the walls all over with porridge ," she said .
and she set about it there and then , and took one ladleful after another and smeared the porridge all over the walls , so that no one could see what they were made of . then they kept the burial feast of the cock who fell into the brewing vat .
and if you don ' t believe it , you had better go there and taste both the beer and the porridge .
