once upon a time there lived a king and queen who were grieved , more grieved than words can tell , because they had no children .
they tried the waters of every country , made vows and pilgrimages , and did everything that could be done , but without result .
at last , however , the queen found that her wishes were fulfilled , and in due course she gave birth to a daughter . a grand christening was held , and all the fairies that could be found in the realm ( they numbered seven in all ) were invited to be godmothers to the little princess .
this was done so that by means of the gifts which each in turn would bestow upon her ( in accordance with the fairy custom of those days ) the princess might be endowed with every imaginable perfection . when the christening ceremony was over , all the company returned to the king ' s palace , where a great banquet was held in honor of the fairies .
places were laid for them in magnificent style , and before each was placed a solid gold casket containing a spoon , fork , and knife of fine gold , set with diamonds and rubies .
but just as all were sitting down to table an aged fairy was seen to enter , whom no one had thought to invite -- the reason being that for more than fifty years she had never quitted the tower in which she lived , and people had supposed her to be dead or bewitched . by the king ' s orders a place was laid for her , but it was impossible to give her a golden casket like the others , for only seven had been made for the seven fairies .
the old creature believed that she was intentionally slighted , and muttered threats between her teeth . she was overheard by one of the young fairies , who was seated nearby .
the latter , guessing that some mischievous gift might be bestowed upon the little princess , hid behind the tapestry as soon as the company left the table .
her intention was to be the last to speak , and so to have the power of counteracting , as far as possible , any evil which the old fairy might do . presently the fairies began to bestow their gifts upon the princess .
the youngest ordained that she should be the most beautiful person in the world ; the next , that she should have the temper of an angel ; the third , that she should do everything with wonderful grace ; the fourth , that she should dance to perfection ; the fifth , that she should sing like a nightingale ; and the sixth , that she should play every kind of music with the utmost skill . it was now the turn of the aged fairy .
shaking her head , in token of spite rather than of infirmity , she declared that the princess should prick her hand with a spindle , and die of it .
a shudder ran through the company at this terrible gift .
all eyes were filled with tears . but at this moment the young fairy stepped forth from behind the tapestry .
" take comfort , your majesties ," she cried in a loud voice .
" your daughter shall not die .
my power , it is true , is not enough to undo all that my aged kinswoman has decreed .
the princess will indeed prick her hand with a spindle .
but instead of dying she shall merely fall into a profound slumber that will last a hundred years .
at the end of that time a king ' s son shall come to awaken her .
" the king , in an attempt to avert the unhappy doom pronounced by the old fairy , at once published an edict forbidding all persons , under pain of death , to use a spinning wheel or keep a spindle in the house . at the end of fifteen or sixteen years the king and queen happened one day to be away , on pleasure bent .
the princess was running about the castle , and going upstairs from room to room she came at length to a garret at the top of a tower , where an old serving woman sat alone with her distaff , spinning .
this good woman had never heard speak of the king ' s proclamation forbidding the use of spinning wheels .
" what are you doing , my good woman ?"
asked the princess .
" i am spinning , my pretty child ," replied the dame , not knowing who she was .
" oh , what fun !"
rejoined the princess .
" how do you do it ?
let me try and see if i can do it equally well .
" partly because she was too hasty , partly because she was a little heedless , but also because the fairy decree had ordained it , no sooner had she seized the spindle than she pricked her hand and fell down in a swoon . in great alarm the good dame cried out for help .
people came running from every quarter to the princess .
they threw water on her face , chafed her with their hands , and rubbed her temples with the royal essence of hungary .
but nothing would restore her . then the king , who had been brought upstairs by the commotion , remembered the fairy prophecy .
feeling certain that what had happened was inevitable , since the fairies had decreed it , he gave orders that the princess should be placed in the finest apartment in the palace , upon a bed embroidered in gold and silver . you would have thought her an angel , so fair was she to behold .
the trance had not taken away the lovely color of her complexion .
her cheeks were delicately flushed , her lips like coral .
her eyes , indeed , were closed , but her gentle breathing could be heard , and it was therefore plain that she was not dead .
the king commanded that she should be left to sleep in peace until the hour of her awakening should come . when the accident happened to the princess , the good fairy who had saved her life by condemning her to sleep a hundred years was in the kingdom of mataquin , twelve thousand leagues away .
she was instantly warned of it , however , by a little dwarf who had a pair of seven - league boots , which are boots that enable one to cover seven leagues at a single step .
the fairy set off at once , and within an hour her chariot of fire , drawn by dragons , was seen approaching . the king handed her down from her chariot , and she approved of all that he had done .
but being gifted with great powers of foresight , she bethought herself that when the princess came to be awakened , she would be much distressed to find herself all alone in the old castle .
and this is what she did . she touched with her wand everybody ( except the king and queen ) who was in the castle -- governesses , maids of honor , ladies - in - waiting , gentlemen , officers , stewards , cooks , scullions , errand boys , guards , porters , pages , footmen .
she touched likewise all the horses in the stables , with their grooms , the big mastiffs in the courtyard , and little puff , the pet dog of the princess , who was lying on the bed beside his mistress .
the moment she had touched them they all fell asleep , to awaken only at the same moment as their mistress .
thus they would always be ready with their service whenever she should require it .
the very spits before the fire , loaded with partridges and pheasants , subsided into slumber , and the fire as well .
all was done in a moment , for the fairies do not take long over their work . then the king and queen kissed their dear child , without waking her , and left the castle .
proclamations were issued , forbidding any approach to it , but these warnings were not needed , for within a quarter of an hour there grew up all round the park so vast a quantity of trees big and small , with interlacing brambles and thorns , that neither man nor beast could penetrate them .
the tops alone of the castle towers could be seen , and these only from a distance .
thus did the fairy ' s magic contrive that the princess , during all the time of her slumber , should have naught whatever to fear from prying eyes . at the end of a hundred years the throne had passed to another family from that of the sleeping princess .
one day the king ' s son chanced to go a - hunting that way , and seeing in the distance some towers in the midst of a large and dense forest , he asked what they were .
his attendants told him in reply the various stories which they had heard .
some said there was an old castle haunted by ghosts , others that all the witches of the neighborhood held their revels there .
the favorite tale was that in the castle lived an ogre , who carried thither all the children whom he could catch .
there he devoured them at his leisure , and since he was the only person who could force a passage through the wood nobody had been able to pursue him . while the prince was wondering what to believe , an old peasant took up the tale .
" your highness ," said he , " more than fifty years ago i heard my father say that in this castle lies a princess , the most beautiful that has ever been seen .
it is her doom to sleep there for a hundred years , and then to be awakened by a king ' s son , for whose coming she waits .
" this story fired the young prince .
he jumped immediately to the conclusion that it was for him to see so gay an adventure through , and impelled alike by the wish for love and glory , he resolved to set about it on the spot . hardly had he taken a step towards the wood when the tall trees , the brambles and the thorns , separated of themselves and made a path for him .
he turned in the direction of the castle , and espied it at the end of a long avenue .
this avenue he entered , and was surprised to notice that the trees closed up again as soon as he had passed , so that none of his retinue were able to follow him .
a young and gallant prince is always brave , however ; so he continued on his way , and presently reached a large forecourt . the sight that now met his gaze was enough to fill him with an icy fear .
the silence of the place was dreadful , and death seemed all about him .
the recumbent figures of men and animals had all the appearance of being lifeless , until he perceived by the pimply noses and ruddy faces of the porters , that they merely slept .
it was plain , too , from their glasses , in which were still some dregs of wine , that they had fallen asleep while drinking . the prince made his way into a great courtyard , paved with marble , and mounting the staircase entered the guardroom .
here the guards were lined up on either side in two ranks , their muskets on their shoulders , snoring their hardest .
through several apartments crowded with ladies and gentlemen in waiting , some seated , some standing , but all asleep , he pushed on , and so came at last to a chamber which was decked all over with gold .
there he encountered the most beautiful sight he had ever seen .
reclining upon a bed , the curtains of which on every side were drawn back , was a princess of seemingly some fifteen or sixteen summers , whose radiant beauty had an almost unearthly luster . trembling in his admiration he drew near and went on his knees beside her .
at the same moment , the hour of disenchantment having come , the princess awoke , and bestowed upon him a look more tender than a first glance might seem to warrant .
" is it you , dear prince ?"
she said .
" you have been long in coming !
" charmed by these words , and especially by the manner in which they were said , the prince scarcely knew how to express his delight and gratification .
he declared that he loved her better than he loved himself .
his words were faltering , but they pleased the more for that .
the less there is of eloquence , the more there is of love . her embarrassment was less than his , and that is not to be wondered at , since she had had time to think of what she would say to him .
it seems ( although the story says nothing about it ) that the good fairy had beguiled her long slumber with pleasant dreams .
to be brief , after four hours of talking they had not succeeded in uttering one half of the things they had to say to each other . now the whole palace had awakened with the princess .
everyone went about his business , and since they were not all in love they presently began to feel mortally hungry .
the lady - in - waiting , who was suffering like the rest , at length lost patience , and in a loud voice called out to the princess that supper was served . the princess was already fully dressed , and in most magnificent style .
as he helped her to rise , the prince refrained from telling her that her clothes , with the straight collar which she wore , were like those to which his grandmother had been accustomed .
and in truth , they in no way detracted from her beauty . they passed into an apartment hung with mirrors , and were there served with supper by the stewards of the household , while the fiddles and oboes played some old music and played it remarkably well , considering they had not played at all for just upon a hundred years .
a little later , when supper was over , the chaplain married them in the castle chapel , and in due course , attended by the courtiers in waiting , they retired to rest . they slept but little , however .
the princess , indeed , had not much need of sleep , and as soon as morning came the prince took his leave of her .
he returned to the city , and told his father , who was awaiting him with some anxiety , that he had lost himself while hunting in the forest , but had obtained some black bread and cheese from a charcoal burner , in whose hovel he had passed the night . his royal father , being of an easygoing nature , believed the tale , but his mother was not so easily hoodwinked .
she noticed that he now went hunting every day , and that he always had an excuse handy when he had slept two or three nights from home .
she felt certain , therefore , that he had some love affair . two whole years passed since the marriage of the prince and princess , and during that time they had two children .
the first , a daughter , was called " dawn ," while the second , a boy , was named " day ," because he seemed even more beautiful than his sister . many a time the queen told her son that he ought to settle down in life .
she tried in this way to make him confide in her , but he did not dare to trust her with his secret .
despite the affection which he bore her , he was afraid of his mother , for she came of a race of ogres , and the king had only married her for her wealth . it was whispered at the court that she had ogrish instincts , and that when little children were near her she had the greatest difficulty in the world to keep herself from pouncing on them . no wonder the prince was reluctant to say a word . but at the end of two years the king died , and the prince found himself on the throne .
he then made public announcement of his marriage , and went in state to fetch his royal consort from her castle .
with her two children beside her she made a triumphal entry into the capital of her husband ' s realm . some time afterwards the king declared war on his neighbor , the emperor cantalabutte .
he appointed the queen mother as regent in his absence , and entrusted his wife and children to her care . he expected to be away at the war for the whole of the summer , and as soon as he was gone the queen mother sent her daughter - in - law and the two children to a country mansion in the forest .
this she did that she might be able the more easily to gratify her horrible longings .
a few days later she went there and in the evening summoned the chief steward .
" for my dinner tomorrow ," she told him , " i will eat little dawn .
"" oh , madam !"
exclaimed the steward .
" that is my will ," said the queen ; and she spoke in the tones of an ogre who longs for raw meat .
" you will serve her with piquant sauce ," she added . the poor man , seeing plainly that it was useless to trifle with an ogress , took his big knife and went up to little dawn ' s chamber .
she was at that time four years old , and when she came running with a smile to greet him , flinging her arms round his neck and coaxing him to give her some sweets , he burst into tears , and let the knife fall from his hand . presently he went down to the yard behind the house , and slaughtered a young lamb .
for this he made so delicious a sauce that his mistress declared she had never eaten anything so good . at the same time the steward carried little dawn to his wife , and bade the latter hide her in the quarters which they had below the yard . eight days later the wicked queen summoned her steward again .
" for my supper ," she announced , " i will eat little day .
" the steward made no answer , being determined to trick her as he had done previously .
he went in search of little day , whom he found with a tiny foil in his hand , making brave passes -- though he was but three years old -- at a big monkey .
he carried him off to his wife , who stowed him away in hiding with little dawn .
to the ogress the steward served up , in place of day , a young kid so tender that she found it surpassingly delicious . so far , so good .
but there came an evening when this evil queen again addressed the steward .
" i have a mind ," she said , " to eat the queen with the same sauce as you served with her children .
" this time the poor steward despaired of being able to practice another deception .
the young queen was twenty years old , without counting the hundred years she had been asleep .
her skin , though white and beautiful , had become a little tough , and what animal could he possibly find that would correspond to her ?
he made up his mind that if he would save his own life he must kill the queen , and went upstairs to her apartment determined to do the deed once and for all .
goading himself into a rage he drew his knife and entered the young queen ' s chamber , but a reluctance to give her no moment of grace made him repeat respectfully the command which he had received from the queen mother .
" do it !
do it !"
she cried , baring her neck to him ; " carry out the order you have been given !
then once more i shall see my children , my poor children that i loved so much !
" nothing had been said to her when the children were stolen away , and she believed them to be dead . the poor steward was overcome by compassion .
" no , no , madam ," he declared .
" you shall not die , but you shall certainly see your children again .
that will be in my quarters , where i have hidden them .
i shall make the queen eat a young hind in place of you , and thus trick her once more .
" without more ado he led her to his quarters , and leaving her there to embrace and weep over her children , proceeded to cook a hind with such art that the queen mother ate it for her supper with as much appetite as if it had indeed been the young queen . the queen mother felt well satisfied with her cruel deeds , and planned to tell the king , on his return , that savage wolves had devoured his consort and his children .
it was her habit , however , to prowl often about the courts and alleys of the mansion , in the hope of scenting raw meat , and one evening she heard the little boy day crying in a basement cellar .
the child was weeping because his mother had threatened to whip him for some naughtiness , and she heard at the same time the voice of dawn begging forgiveness for her brother . the ogress recognized the voices of the queen and her children , and was enraged to find she had been tricked .
the next morning , in tones so affrighting that all trembled , she ordered a huge vat to be brought into the middle of the courtyard .
this she filled with vipers and toads , with snakes and serpents of every kind , intending to cast into it the queen and her children , and the steward with his wife and serving girl .
by her command these were brought forward , with their hands tied behind their backs . there they were , and her minions were making ready to cast them into the vat , when into the courtyard rode the king !
nobody had expected him so soon , but he had traveled posthaste .
filled with amazement , he demanded to know what this horrible spectacle meant . none dared tell him , and at that moment the ogress , enraged at what confronted her , threw herself head foremost into the vat , and was devoured on the instant by the hideous creatures she had placed in it . the king could not but be sorry , for after all she was his mother ; but it was not long before he found ample consolation in his beautiful wife and children . moral : many a girl has waited long for a husband brave or strong ; but i ' m sure i never met any sort of woman yet who could wait a hundred years , free from fretting , free from fears .
now , our story seems to show that a century or so , late or early , matters not ; true love comes by fairy - lot .
some old folk will even say it grows better by delay .
yet this good advice , i fear , helps us neither there nor here .
though philosophers may prate how much wiser ' tis to wait , maids will be a - sighing still -- young blood must when young blood will !
