one very fine day it came to pass that the good god wished to enjoy himself in the heavenly garden , and took all the apostles and saints with him , so that no one stayed in heaven but saint peter .
the lord had commanded him to let no one in during his absence , so peter stood by the door and kept watch .
before long some one knocked .
peter asked who was there , and what he wanted ?
" i am a poor , honest tailor who prays for admission ," replied a smooth voice .
" honest indeed ," said peter , " like the thief on the gallows !
thou hast been light - fingered and hast snipped folks ' clothes away .
thou wilt not get into heaven .
the lord hath forbidden me to let any one in while he is out ."
- " come , do be merciful ," cried the tailor .
" little scraps which fall off the table of their own accord are not stolen , and are not worth speaking about .
look , i am lame , and have blisters on my feet with walking here , i cannot possibly turn back again .
only let me in , and i will do all the rough work .
i will carry the children , and wash their clothes , and wash and clean the benches on which they have been playing , and patch all their torn clothes ."
saint peter let himself be moved by pity , and opened the door of heaven just wide enough for the lame tailor to slip his lean body in .
he was forced to sit down in a corner behind the door , and was to stay quietly and peaceably there , in order that the lord , when he returned , might not observe him and be angry .
the tailor obeyed , but once when saint peter went outside the door , he got up , and full of curiosity , went round about into every corner of heaven , and inspected the arrangement of every place .
at length he came to a spot where many beautiful and delightful chairs were standing , and in the midst was a seat all of gold which was set with shining jewels , likewise it was much higher than the other chairs , and a footstool of gold was before it .
it was , however , the seat on which the lord sat when he was at home , and from which he could see everything which happened on earth .
the tailor stood still , and looked at the seat for a long time , for it pleased him better than all else .
at last he could master his curiosity no longer , and climbed up and seated himself in the chair .
then he saw everything which was happening on earth , and observed an ugly old woman who was standing washing by the side of a stream , secretly laying two veils on one side for herself .
the sight of this made the tailor so angry that he laid hold of the golden footstool , and threw it down to earth through heaven , at the old thief .
as , however , he could not bring the stool back again , he slipped quietly out of the chair , seated himself in his place behind the door , and behaved as if he had never stirred from the spot . when the lord and master came back again with his heavenly companions , he did not see the tailor behind the door , but when he seated himself on his chair the footstool was missing .
he asked saint peter what had become of the stool , but he did not know .
then he asked if he had let anyone come in .
" i know of no one who has been here ," answered peter , " but a lame tailor , who is still sitting behind the door ."
then the lord had the tailor brought before him , and asked him if he had taken away the stool , and where he had put it ?
" oh , lord ," answered the tailor joyously , " i threw it in my anger down to earth at an old woman whom i saw stealing two veils at the washing ."
- " oh , thou knave ," said the lord , " were i to judge as thou judgest , how dost thou think thou couldst have escaped so long ?
i should long ago have had no chairs , benches , seats , nay , not even an oven - fork , but should have thrown everything down at the sinners .
henceforth thou canst stay no longer in heaven , but must go outside the door again .
then go where thou wilt .
no one shall give punishment here , but i alone , the lord .
" peter was obliged to take the tailor out of heaven again , and as he had torn shoes , and feet covered with blisters , he took a stick in his hand , and went to " wait - a - bit ," where the good soldiers sit and make merry .
