there lived in the village of miano a man and his wife , who had no children whatever , and they longed with the greatest eagerness to have an heir .
the woman , above all , was for ever saying , " o heavens !
if i might but have a little baby -- i should not care , were it even a sprig of a myrtle ."
and she repeated this song so often , and so wearied heaven with these words , that at last her wish was granted ; and at the end of nine months , instead of a little boy or girl , she placed in the hands of the nurse a fine sprig of myrtle .
this she planted with great delight in a pot , ornamented with ever so many beautiful figures , and set it in the window , tending it morning and evening with more diligence than the gardener does a bed of cabbages from which he reckons to pay the rent of his garden . now the king ' s son happening to pass by , as he was going to hunt , took a prodigious fancy to this beautiful plant , and sent to ask the mistress of the house if she would sell it , for he would give even one of his eyes for it .
the woman at last , after a thousand difficulties and refusals , allured by his offers , dazzled by his promises , frightened by his threats , overcome by his prayers , gave him the pot , beseeching him to hold it dear , for she loved it more than a daughter , and valued it as much as if it were her own offspring .
then the prince had the flowerpot carried with the greatest care in the world into his own chamber , and placed it in a balcony , and tended and watered it with his own hand . it happened one evening , when the prince had gone to bed , and put out the candles , and all were at rest and in their first sleep , that he heard the sound of some one stealing through the house , and coming cautiously towards his bed ; whereat he thought it must be some chamber - boy coming to lighten his purse for him , or some mischievous imp to pull the bedclothes off him .
but as he was a bold fellow , whom none could frighten , he acted the dead cat , waiting to see the upshot of the affair .
when he perceived the object approach nearer , and stretching out his hand felt something smooth , and instead of laying hold , as he expected , on the prickles of a hedgehog , he touched a little creature more soft and fine than barbary wool , more pliant and tender than a marten ' s tail , more delicate than thistledown , he flew from one thought to another , and taking her to be a fairy ( as indeed she was ), he conceived at once a great affection for her .
the next morning , before the sun , like a chief physician , went out to visit the flowers that are sick and languid , the unknown fair one rose and disappeared , leaving the prince filled with curiosity and wonder . but when this had gone on for seven days , he was burning and melting with desire to know what good fortune this was that the stars had showered down on him , and what ship freighted with the graces of love it was that had come to its moorings in his chamber .
so one night , when the fair maiden was fast asleep , he tied one of her tresses to his arm , that she might not escape ; then he called a chamberlain , and bidding him light the candles , he saw the flower of beauty , the miracle of women , the looking - glass and painted egg of venus , the fair bait of love -- he saw a little doll , a beautiful dove , a fata morgana , a banner -- he saw a golden trinket , a hunter , a falcon ' s eye , a moon in her fifteenth day , a pigeon ' s bill , a morsel for a king , a jewel -- he saw , in short , a sight to amaze one . in astonishment he cried , " o sleep , sweet sleep !
heap poppies on the eyes of this lovely jewel ; interrupt not my delight in viewing as long as i desire this triumph of beauty .
o lovely tress that binds me !
o lovely eyes that inflame me !
o lovely lips that refresh me !
o lovely bosom that consoles me !
oh where , at what shop of the wonders of nature , was this living statue made ?
what india gave the gold for these hairs ?
what ethiopia the ivory to form these brows ?
what seashore the carbuncles that compose these eyes ?
what tyre the purple to dye this face ?
what east the pearls to string these teeth ?
and from what mountains was the snow taken to sprinkle over this bosom -- snow contrary to nature , that nurtures the flowers and burns hearts ?
" so saying he made a vine of his arms , and clasping her neck , she awoke from her sleep and replied , with a gentle smile , to the sigh of the enamored prince ; who , seeing her open her eyes , said , " o my treasure , if viewing without candles this temple of love i was in transports , what will become of my life now that you have lighted two lamps ?
o beauteous eyes , that with a trump - card of light make the stars bankrupt , you alone have pierced this heart , you alone can make a poultice for it like fresh eggs !
o my lovely physician , take pity , take pity on one who is sick of love ; who , having changed the air from the darkness of night to the light of this beauty , is seized by a fever ; lay your hand on this heart , feel my pulse , give me a prescription .
but , my soul , why do i ask for a prescription ?
i desire no other comfort than a touch of that little hand ; for i am certain that with the cordial of that fair grace , and with the healing root of that tongue of thine , i shall be sound and well again .
" at these words the lovely fairy grew as red as fire , and replied , " not so much praise , my lord prince !
i am your servant , and would do anything in the world to serve that kingly face ; and i esteem it great good fortune that from a bunch of myrtle , set in a pot of earth , i have become a branch of laurel hung over the inn - door of a heart in which there is so much greatness and virtue .
" the prince , melting at these words like a tallow - candle , began again to embrace her ; and sealing the latter with a kiss , he gave her his hand , saying , " take my faith , you shall be my wife , you shall be mistress of my scepter , you shall have the key of this heart , as you hold the helm of this life ."
after these and a hundred other ceremonies and discourses they arose . and so it went on for several days .
but as spoilsport , marriage - parting fate is always a hindrance to the steps of love , it fell out that the prince was summoned to hunt a great wild boar which was ravaging the country .
so he was forced to leave his wife .
but as he loved her more than his life , and saw that she was beautiful beyond all beautiful things , from this love and beauty there sprang up the feeling of jealousy , which is a tempest in the sea of love , a piece of soot that falls into the pottage of the bliss of lovers -- which is a serpent that bites , a worm that gnaws , a gall that poisons , a frost that kills , making life always restless , the mind unstable , the heart ever suspicious .
so , calling the fairy , he said to her , " i am obliged , my heart , to be away from home for two or three days ; heaven knows with how much grief i tear myself from you , who are my soul ; and heaven knows too whether , ere i set out , my life may not end ; but as i cannot help going , to please my father , i must leave you .
i , therefore , pray you , by all the love you bear me , to go back into the flowerpot , and not to come out of it till i return , which will be as soon as possible .
"" i will do so ," said the fairy , " for i cannot and will not refuse what pleases you .
go , therefore , and may the mother of good luck go with you , for i will serve you to the best of my power .
but do me one favor ; leave a thread of silk with a bell tied to the top of the myrtle , and when you come back pull the thread and ring , and immediately i will come out and say , here i am .
'" the prince did so , and then calling a chamberlain , said to him , " come hither , come hither , you !
open your ears and mind what i say .
make this bed every evening , as if i were myself to sleep in it .
water this flowerpot regularly , and mind , i have counted the leaves , and if i find one missing i will take from you the means of earning your bread ."
so saying he mounted his horse , and went , like a sheep that is led to the slaughter , to follow a boar .
in the meanwhile seven wicked women , with whom the prince had been acquainted , began to grow jealous ; and being curious to pry into the secret , they sent for a mason , and for a good sum of money got him to make an underground passage from their house into theprince ' s chamber .
then these cunning jades went through the passage in order to explore .
but finding nothing , they opened the window ; and when they saw the beautiful myrtle standing there , each of them plucked a leaf from it ; but the youngest took off the entire top , to which the little bell was hung ; and the moment it was touched the bell tinkled and the fairy , thinking it was the prince , immediately came out . as soon as the wicked women saw this lovely creature they fastened their talons on her , crying , " you are she who turns to your own mill the stream of our hopes !
you it is who have stolen the favor of the prince !
but you are come to an end of your tricks , my fine lady !
you are nimble enough in running off , but you are caught in your tricks this time , and if you escape , you were never born .
" so saying , they flew upon her , and instantly tore her in pieces , and each of them took her part .
but the youngest would not join in this cruel act ; and when she was invited by her sisters to do as they did , she would take nothing but a lock of those golden hairs .
so when they had done they went quickly away by the passage through which they had come . meanwhile the chamberlain came to make the bed and water the flowerpot , according to his master ' s orders , and seeing this pretty piece of work , he had like to have died of terror .
then , biting his nails with vexation , he set to work , gathered up the remains of the flesh and bones that were left , and scraping the blood from the floor , he piled them all up in a heap in the pot ; and having watered it , he made the bed , locked the door , put the key under the door , and taking to his heels ran away out of the town . when the prince came back from the chase , he pulled the silken string and rung the little bell ; but ring as he would it was all lost time ; he might sound the tocsin , and ring till he was tired , for the fairy gave no heed .
so he went straight to the chamber , and not having patience to call the chamberlain and ask for the key , he gave the lock a kick , burst open the door , went in , opened the window , and seeing the myrtle stript of its leaves , he fell to making a most doleful lamentation , crying , shouting , and bawling , " o wretched me !
unhappy me !
o miserable me !
who has played me this trick ?
and who has thus trumped my card ?
o ruined , banished , and undone prince !
o my leafless myrtle !
my lost fairy !
o my wretched life !
my joys vanished into smoke !
my pleasures turned to vinegar !
what will you do , unhappy man !
leap quickly over this ditch !
you have fallen from all happiness , and will you not cut your throat ?
you are robbed of every treasure !
you are expelled from life , and do you not go mad ?
where are you ?
where are you , my myrtle ?
and what soul more hard than marble has destroyed this beautiful flowerpot ?
o cursed chase , that has chased me from all happiness !
alas !
i am done for , i am overthrown , i am ruined , i have ended my days ; it is not possible for me to get through life without my life ; i must stretch my legs , since without my love sleep will be lamentation , food , poison , pleasure insipid , and life sour .
" these and many other exclamations that would move the very stones in the streets , were uttered by the prince ; and after repeating them again and again , and wailing bitterly , full of sorrow and woe , never shutting an eye to sleep , nor opening his mouth to eat , he gave such way to grief , that his face , which was before of oriental vermilion , became of gold paint , and the ham of his lips became rusty bacon . the fairy , who had sprouted up again from the remains that were put in the pot , seeing the misery and tribulation of her poor lover , and how he was turned in a second to the color of a sick spaniard , of a venomous lizard , of the sap of a leaf , of a jaundiced person , of a dried pear , was moved with compassion ; and springing out of the pot , like the light of a candle shooting out of a dark lantern , she stood before cola marchione , and embracing him in her arms she said , " take heart , take heart , my prince !
have done now with this lamenting , wipe your eyes , quiet your anger , smooth your face .
behold me alive and handsome , in spite of those wicked women , who split my head and so ill - treated me .
" the prince , seeing this when he least expected it , arose again from death to life , and the color returned to his cheeks , warmth to his blood , breath to his breast .
after giving her a thousand caresses and embraces , he desired to know the whole affair from head to foot ; and when he found that the chamberlain was not to blame , he ordered him to be called , and giving a great banquet , he , with the full consent of his father , married the fairy .
and he invited all the great people of the kingdom , but , above all others , he would have present those seven serpents who had committed the slaughter of that sweet suckling - calf .
and as soon as they had done eating , the prince asked all the guests , one after another , what he deserved who had injured that beautiful maiden -- pointing to the fairy , who looked so lovely that she shot hearts like a sprite and drew souls like a windlass . then all who sat at table , beginning with the king , said , one that he deserved the gallows , another that he merited the wheel , a third the pincers , a fourth to be thrown from a precipice ; in short one proposed this punishment and another that .
at last it came to the turn of the seven wicked women to speak , who , although they did not much relish this conversation , yet , as the truth comes out when the wine goes about , answered , that whoever had the heart basely to touch only this quintessence of the charms of love deserved to be buried alive in a dungeon .
" as you have pronounced this sentence with your own lips ," said the prince , " you have yourselves judged the cause , you have yourselves signed the decree .
it remains for me to cause your order to be executed , since it is you who with the heart of a negro , with the cruelty of medea , made a fritter of this beautiful head , and chopped up these lovely limbs like sausage - meat .
so quick , make haste , lose not a moment !
throw them this very instant into a large dungeon , where they shall end their days miserably .
" so this order was instantly carried into execution .
the prince married the youngest sister of these wicked creatures to the chamberlain , and gave her a good portion .
and giving also to the father and mother of the myrtle wherewithal to live comfortably , he himself spent his days happily with the fairy ; while the wicked women ended their lives in bitter anguish , and thus verified the proverb of the wise men of old --" the lame goat will hopif he meets with no stop ."
