once upon a time there lived in a certain village a little country girl , the prettiest creature who was ever seen .
her mother was excessively fond of her ; and her grandmother doted on her still more .
this good woman had a little red riding hood made for her .
it suited the girl so extremely well that everybody called her little red riding hood . one day her mother , having made some cakes , said to her , " go , my dear , and see how your grandmother is doing , for i hear she has been very ill . take her a cake , and this little pot of butter .
" little red riding hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother , who lived in another village . as she was going through the wood , she met with a wolf , who had a very great mind to eat her up , but he dared not , because of some woodcutters working nearby in the forest .
he asked her where she was going .
the poor child , who did not know that it was dangerous to stay and talk to a wolf , said to him , " i am going to see my grandmother and carry her a cake and a little pot of butter from my mother .
"" does she live far off ?"
said the wolf " oh i say ," answered little red riding hood ; " it is beyond that mill you see there , at the first house in the village .
"" well ," said the wolf , " and i ' ll go and see her too .
i ' ll go this way and go you that , and we shall see who will be there first .
" the wolf ran as fast as he could , taking the shortest path , and the little girl took a roundabout way , entertaining herself by gathering nuts , running after butterflies , and gathering bouquets of little flowers .
it was not long before the wolf arrived at the old woman ' s house .
he knocked at the door : tap , tap .
" who ' s there ?
"" your grandchild , little red riding hood ," replied the wolf , counterfeiting her voice ; " who has brought you a cake and a little pot of butter sent you by mother .
" the good grandmother , who was in bed , because she was somewhat ill , cried out , " pull the bobbin , and the latch will go up .
" the wolf pulled the bobbin , and the door opened , and then he immediately fell upon the good woman and ate her up in a moment , for it been more than three days since he had eaten .
he then shut the door and got into the grandmother ' s bed , expecting little red riding hood , who came some time afterwards and knocked at the door : tap , tap .
" who ' s there ?
" little red riding hood , hearing the big voice of the wolf , was at first afraid ; but believing her grandmother had a cold and was hoarse , answered , " it is your grandchild little red riding hood , who has brought you a cake and a little pot of butter mother sends you .
" the wolf cried out to her , softening his voice as much as he could , " pull the bobbin , and the latch will go up .
" little red riding hood pulled the bobbin , and the door opened . the wolf , seeing her come in , said to her , hiding himself under the bedclothes , " put the cake and the little pot of butter upon the stool , and come get into bed with me .
" little red riding hood took off her clothes and got into bed .
she was greatly amazed to see how her grandmother looked in her nightclothes , and said to her , " grandmother , what big arms you have !
"" all the better to hug you with , my dear .
"" grandmother , what big legs you have !
"" all the better to run with , my child .
"" grandmother , what big ears you have !
"" all the better to hear with , my child .
"" grandmother , what big eyes you have !
"" all the better to see with , my child .
"" grandmother , what big teeth you have got !
"" all the better to eat you up with .
" and , saying these words , this wicked wolf fell upon little red riding hood , and ate her all up . moral : children , especially attractive , well bred young ladies , should never talk to strangers , for if they should do so , they may well provide dinner for a wolf .
i say " wolf ," but there are various kinds of wolves .
there are also those who are charming , quiet , polite , unassuming , complacent , and sweet , who pursue young women at home and in the streets .
and unfortunately , it is these gentle wolves who are the most dangerous ones of all .
