there was once a man who had fine houses , both in town and country , a deal of silver and gold plate , embroidered furniture , and coaches gilded all over with gold .
but this man was so unlucky as to have a blue beard , which made him so frightfully ugly that all the women and girls ran away from him . one of his neighbors , a lady of quality , had two daughters who were perfect beauties .
he desired of her one of them in marriage , leaving to her choice which of the two she would bestow on him .
neither of them would have him , and they sent him backwards and forwards from one to the other , not being able to bear the thoughts of marrying a man who had a blue beard .
adding to their disgust and aversion was the fact that he already had been married to several wives , and nobody knew what had become of them . blue beard , to engage their affection , took them , with their mother and three or four ladies of their acquaintance , with other young people of the neighborhood , to one of his country houses , where they stayed a whole week . the time was filled with parties , hunting , fishing , dancing , mirth , and feasting .
nobody went to bed , but all passed the night in rallying and joking with each other .
in short , everything succeeded so well that the youngest daughter began to think that the man ' s beard was not so very blue after all , and that he was a mighty civil gentleman . as soon as they returned home , the marriage was concluded .
about a month afterwards , blue beard told his wife that he was obliged to take a country journey for six weeks at least , about affairs of very great consequence .
he desired her to divert herself in his absence , to send for her friends and acquaintances , to take them into the country , if she pleased , and to make good cheer wherever she was .
" here ," said he ," are the keys to the two great wardrobes , wherein i have my best furniture .
these are to my silver and gold plate , which is not everyday in use .
these open my strongboxes , which hold my money , both gold and silver ; these my caskets of jewels .
and this is the master key to all my apartments .
but as for this little one here , it is the key to the closet at the end of the great hall on the ground floor .
open them all ; go into each and every one of them , except that little closet , which i forbid you , and forbid it in such a manner that , if you happen to open it , you may expect my just anger and resentment .
" she promised to observe , very exactly , whatever he had ordered .
then he , after having embraced her , got into his coach and proceeded on his journey . her neighbors and good friends did not wait to be sent for by the newly married lady .
they were impatient to see all the rich furniture of her house , and had not dared to come while her husband was there , because of his blue beard , which frightened them .
they ran through all the rooms , closets , and wardrobes , which were all so fine and rich that they seemed to surpass one another . after that , they went up into the two great rooms , which contained the best and richest furniture .
they could not sufficiently admire the number and beauty of the tapestry , beds , couches , cabinets , stands , tables , and looking glasses , in which you might see yourself from head to foot ; some of them were framed with glass , others with silver , plain and gilded , the finest and most magnificent that they had ever seen . they ceased not to extol and envy the happiness of their friend , who in the meantime in no way diverted herself in looking upon all these rich things , because of the impatience she had to go and open the closet on the ground floor .
she was so much pressed by her curiosity that , without considering that it was very uncivil for her to leave her company , she went down a little back staircase , and with such excessive haste that she nearly fell and broke her neck . having come to the closet door , she made a stop for some time , thinking about her husband ' s orders , and considering what unhappiness might attend her if she was disobedient ; but the temptation was so strong that she could not overcome it .
she then took the little key , and opened it , trembling .
at first she could not see anything plainly , because the windows were shut .
after some moments she began to perceive that the floor was all covered over with clotted blood , on which lay the bodies of several dead women , ranged against the walls .
( these were all the wives whom blue beard had married and murdered , one after another .)
she thought she should have died for fear , and the key , which she , pulled out of the lock , fell out of her hand . after having somewhat recovered her surprise , she picked up the key , locked the door , and went upstairs into her chamber to recover ; but she could not , so much was she frightened .
having observed that the key to the closet was stained with blood , she tried two or three times to wipe it off ; but the blood would not come out ; in vain did she wash it , and even rub it with soap and sand .
the blood still remained , for the key was magical and she could never make it quite clean ; when the blood was gone off from one side , it came again on the other . blue beard returned from his journey the same evening , saying that he had received letters upon the road , informing him that the affair he went about had concluded to his advantage .
his wife did all she could to convince him that she was extremely happy about his speedy return . the next morning he asked her for the keys , which she gave him , but with such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened ." what !"
said he , " is not the key of my closet among the rest ?
"" i must ," said she , " have left it upstairs upon the table .
"" fail not ," said blue beard , " to bring it to me at once .
" after several goings backwards and forwards , she was forced to bring him the key .
blue beard , having very attentively considered it , said to his wife , " why is there blood on the key ?
"" i do not know ," cried the poor woman , paler than death .
" you do not know !"
replied blue beard .
" i very well know .
you went into the closet , did you not ?
very well , madam ; you shall go back , and take your place among the ladies you saw there .
" upon this she threw herself at her husband ' s feet , and begged his pardon with all the signs of a true repentance , vowing that she would never more be disobedient .
she would have melted a rock , so beautiful and sorrowful was she ; but blue beard had a heart harder than any rock !
" you must die , madam ," said he , " at once .
"" since i must die ," answered she ( looking upon him with her eyes all bathed in tears ), " give me some little time to say my prayers .
"" i give you ," replied blue beard , " half a quarter of an hour , but not one moment more .
" when she was alone she called out to her sister , and said to her , " sister anne " ( for that was her name ), " go up , i beg you , to the top of the tower , and look if my brothers are not coming .
they promised me that they would come today , and if you see them , give them a sign to make haste .
" her sister anne went up to the top of the tower , and the poor afflicted wife cried out from time to time , " anne , sister anne , do you see anyone coming ?
" and sister anne said , " i see nothing but a cloud of dust in the sun , and the green grass .
" in the meanwhile blue beard , holding a great saber in his hand , cried out as loud as he could bawl to his wife , " come down instantly , or i shall come up to you .
"" one moment longer , if you please ," said his wife ; and then she cried out very softly , " anne , sister anne , do you see anybody coming ?
" and sister anne answered , " i see nothing but a cloud of dust in the sun , and the green grass .
"" come down quickly ," cried blue beard , " or i will come up to you .
"" i am coming ," answered his wife ; and then she cried , " anne , sister anne , do you not see anyone coming ?
"" i see ," replied sister anne , " a great cloud of dust approaching us .
"" are they my brothers ?
"" alas , no my dear sister , i see a flock of sheep .
"" will you not come down ?"
cried blue beard .
" one moment longer ," said his wife , and then she cried out , " anne , sister anne , do you see nobody coming ?
"" i see ," said she , " two horsemen , but they are still a great way off .
"" god be praised ," replied the poor wife joyfully .
" they are my brothers .
i will make them a sign , as well as i can for them to make haste .
" then blue beard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house tremble .
the distressed wife came down , and threw herself at his feet , all in tears , with her hair about her shoulders .
" this means nothing ," said blue beard .
" you must die !"
then , taking hold of her hair with one hand , and lifting up the sword with the other , he prepared to strike off her head .
the poor lady , turning about to him , and looking at him with dying eyes , desired him to afford her one little moment to recollect herself .
" no , no ," said he , " commend yourself to god ," and was just ready to strike . at this very instant there was such a loud knocking at the gate that blue beard made a sudden stop .
the gate was opened , and two horsemen entered .
drawing their swords , they ran directly to blue beard .
he knew them to be his wife ' s brothers , one a dragoon , the other a musketeer ; so that he ran away immediately to save himself ; but the two brothers pursued and overtook him before he could get to the steps of the porch .
then they ran their swords through his body and left him dead .
the poor wife was almost as dead as her husband , and had not strength enough to rise and welcome her brothers . blue beard had no heirs , and so his wife became mistress of all his estate .
she made use of one part of it to marry her sister anne to a young gentleman who had loved her a long while ; another part to buy captains ' commissions for her brothers , and the rest to marry herself to a very worthy gentleman , who made her forget the ill time she had passed with blue beard . moral : curiosity , in spite of its appeal , often leads to deep regret .
to the displeasure of many a maiden , its enjoyment is short lived .
once satisfied , it ceases to exist , and always costs dearly . another moral : apply logic to this grim story , and you will ascertain that it took place many years ago .
no husband of our age would be so terrible as to demand the impossible of his wife , nor would he be such a jealous malcontent .
for , whatever the color of her husband ' s beard , the wife of today will let him know who the master is .
