there was a miller whose only inheritance to his three sons was his mill , his donkey , and his cat .
the division was soon made .
they hired neither a clerk nor an attorney , for they would have eaten up all the poor patrimony .
the eldest took the mill , the second the donkey , and the youngest nothing but the cat . the poor young fellow was quite comfortless for having received so little .
" my brothers ," said he , " may make a handsome living by joining their shares together ; but , for my part , after i have eaten up my cat , and made myself a muff from his skin , i must then die of hunger .
" the cat , who heard all this , but pretended otherwise , said to him with a grave and serious air , " do not be so concerned , my good master .
if you will but give me a bag , and have a pair of boots made for me , that i may scamper through the dirt and the brambles , then you shall see that you are not so poorly off with me as you imagine .
" the cat ' s master did not build very much upon what he said .
however , he had often seen him play a great many cunning tricks to catch rats and mice , such as hanging by his heels , or hiding himself in the meal , and pretending to be dead ; so he did take some hope that he might give him some help in his miserable condition . after receiving what he had asked for , the cat gallantly pulled on the boots and slung the bag about his neck .
holding its drawstrings in his forepaws , he went to a place where there was a great abundance of rabbits .
he put some bran and greens into his bag , then stretched himself out as if he were dead .
he thus waited for some young rabbits , not yet acquainted with the deceits of the world , to come and look into his bag . he had scarcely lain down before he had what he wanted .
a rash and foolish young rabbit jumped into his bag , and the master cat , immediately closed the strings , then took and killed him without pity . proud of his prey , he went with it to the palace , and asked to speak with his majesty .
he was shown upstairs into the king ' s apartment , and , making a low bow , said to him , " sir , i have brought you a rabbit from my noble lord , the master of carabas " ( for that was the title which the cat was pleased to give his master ).
" tell your master ," said the king , " that i thank him , and that i am very pleased with his gift .
" another time he went and hid himself in a grain field .
he again held his bag open , and when a brace of partridges ran into it , he drew the strings , and caught them both .
he presented these to the king , as he had done before with the rabbit .
the king , in like manner , received the partridges with great pleasure , and gave him a tip .
the cat continued , from time to time for two or three months , to take game to his majesty from his master . one day , when he knew for certain that the king would be taking a drive along the riverside with his daughter , the most beautiful princess in the world , he said to his master , " if you will follow my advice your fortune is made .
all you must do is to go and bathe yourself in the river at the place i show you , then leave the rest to me .
" the marquis of carabas did what the cat advised him to , without knowing why .
while he was bathing the king passed by , and the cat began to cry out , " help !
help !
my lord marquis of carabas is going to be drowned .
" at this noise the king put his head out of the coach window , and , finding it was the cat who had so often brought him such good game , he commanded his guards to run immediately to the assistance of his lordship the marquis of carabas .
while they were drawing the poor marquis out of the river , the cat came up to the coach and told the king that , while his master was bathing , some rogues had come by and stolen his clothes , even though he had cried out , " thieves !
thieves !"
several times , as loud as he could .
in truth , the cunning cat had hidden the clothes under a large stone . the king immediately commanded the officers of his wardrobe to run and fetch one of his best suits for the lord marquis of carabas . the king received him very courteously .
and , because the king ' s fine clothes gave him a striking appearance ( for he was very handsome and well proportioned ), the king ' s daughter took a secret inclination to him .
the marquis of carabas had only to cast two or three respectful and somewhat tender glances at her but she fell head over heels in love with him .
the king asked him to enter the coach and join them on their drive . the cat , quite overjoyed to see how his project was succeeding , ran on ahead .
meeting some countrymen who were mowing a meadow , he said to them , " my good fellows , if you do not tell the king that the meadow you are mowing belongs to my lord marquis of carabas , you shall be chopped up like mincemeat .
" the king did not fail to ask the mowers whose meadow it was that they were mowing .
" it belongs to my lord marquis of carabas ," they answered altogether , for the cat ' s threats had frightened them .
" you see , sir ," said the marquis , " this is a meadow which never fails to yield a plentiful harvest every year .
" the master cat , still running on ahead , met with some reapers , and said to them , " my good fellows , if you do not tell the king that all this grain belongs to the marquis of carabas , you shall be chopped up like mincemeat .
" the king , who passed by a moment later , asked them whose grain it was that they were reaping .
" it belongs to my lord marquis of carabas ," replied the reapers , which pleased both the king and the marquis .
the king congratulated him for his fine harvest .
the master cat continued to run ahead and said the same words to all he met .
the king was astonished at the vast estates of the lord marquis of carabas . the master cat came at last to a stately castle , the lord of which was an ogre , the richest that had ever been known .
all the lands which the king had just passed by belonged to this castle .
the cat , who had taken care to inform himself who this ogre was and what he could do , asked to speak with him , saying he could not pass so near his castle without having the honor of paying his respects to him . the ogre received him as civilly as an ogre could do , and invited him to sit down .
" i have heard ," said the cat , " that you are able to change yourself into any kind of creature that you have a mind to .
you can , for example , transform yourself into a lion , an elephant , or the like .
"" that is true ," answered the ogre very briskly ; " and to convince you , i shall now become a lion .
" the cat was so terrified at the sight of a lion so near him that he leaped onto the roof , which caused him even more difficulty , because his boots were of no use at all to him in walking on the tiles .
however , the ogre resumed his natural form , and the cat came down , saying that he had been very frightened indeed .
" i have further been told ," said the cat , " that you can also transform yourself into the smallest of animals , for example , a rat or a mouse .
but i can scarcely believe that .
i must admit to you that i think that that would be quite impossible ."" impossible !"
cried the ogre .
" you shall see !
" he immediately changed himself into a mouse and began to run about the floor .
as soon as the cat saw this , he fell upon him and ate him up . meanwhile the king , who saw this fine castle of the ogre ' s as he passed , decided to go inside .
the cat , who heard the noise of his majesty ' s coach running over the drawbridge , ran out and said to the king , " your majesty is welcome to this castle of my lord marquis of carabas ."" what !
my lord marquis ," cried the king , " and does this castle also belong to you ?
there can be nothing finer than this court and all the stately buildings which surround it .
let us go inside , if you don ' t mind .
" the marquis gave his hand to the princess , and followed the king , who went first .
they passed into a spacious hall , where they found a magnificent feast , which the ogre had prepared for his friends , who were coming to visit him that very day , but dared not to enter , knowing the king was there . his majesty was perfectly charmed with the good qualities of my lord marquis of carabas , as was his daughter , who had fallen violently in love with him , and , seeing the vast estate he possessed , said to him , after having drunk five or six glasses , " it will be your own fault , my lord marquis , if you do not become my son - in - law .
" the marquis , making several low bows , accepted the honor which his majesty conferred upon him , and forthwith , that very same day , married the princess . the cat became a great lord , and never again ran after mice , except for entertainment . moral : there is great advantage in receiving a large inheritance , but diligence and ingenuity are worth more than wealth acquired from others . another moral : if a miller ' s son can win the heart of a princess in so short a time , causing her to gaze at him with lovelorn eyes , it must be due to his clothes , his appearance , and his youth .
these things do play a role in matters of the heart .
