once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters .
the elder was often mistaken for her mother , so like her was she both in nature and in looks .
both of them were so disagreeable and arrogant that no one could live with them . the younger girl , who was a true likeness of her father in the gentleness and sweetness of her disposition , was also one of the most beautiful girls imaginable .
the mother doted on the elder daughter naturally enough , since she resembled her so closely ; and she disliked the younger one just as intensely .
she made her eat all her meals in the kitchen and work from morning till night . one of the poor child ' s many duties was to go twice a day and draw water from a spring a good half mile away , bringing it back in a large pitcher .
one day when she was at the spring an old woman came up and begged for a drink .
" why , certainly , good mother ," said the beautiful girl .
rinsing the pitcher , she drew some water from the cleanest part of the spring and handed it to her , lifting up the pitcher so that she might drink more easily . now this old woman was a fairy , who had taken the form of a poor peasant woman to see just how far the girl ' s good nature would go .
" you are so beautiful ," she said , when she had finished drinking , " and so polite , that i am determined to bestow a gift upon you .
i grant you ," the fairy continued , " that with every word you speak , a flower or a precious stone shall fall from your mouth .
" when the beautiful girl arrived at home , her mother scolded her for staying so long at the spring .
" i beg your pardon , mother ," said the poor child , " for having taken so long ," and as she spoke these words , two roses , two pearls , and two large diamonds fell from her mouth .
" what am i seeing ?"
cried her mother .
" i do believe that i saw pearls and diamonds dropping out of your mouth ?
what have you been doing , my daughter ?"
( this was the first time she had ever called her her daughter .
) the poor child related what had happened , scattering countless diamonds as she spoke ." indeed !"
cried her mother .
" i must send my own daughter there .
come here , fanchon .
look what comes out of your sister ' s mouth whenever she speaks !
wouldn ' t you like to be able to do the same thing ?
all you have to do is to go and draw some water at the spring , and when a poor woman asks you for a drink , give it to her very nicely .
"" you want to see me going to the spring ?"
replied the ill - mannered girl .
" i am telling you that you are to go ," replied the mother , " and this very instant !
" very sulkily the girl went out taking with her the best silver flask in the house .
no sooner had she reached the spring than she saw a magnificently dressed lady , who came out of the woods towards her and asked for a drink .
this was the same fairy who had appeared to her sister , but she was now disguised as a princess in order to see how far this girl ' s bad manners would go .
" do you think i have come here just to get you a drink ?"
she said the rude girl arrogantly .
" do you think i brought a silver flask here just to give madam a drink ?
yes , that ' s just what i think !
have a drink , if you must !
"" you are not very polite ," replied the fairy , showing no anger .
" very well !
in return for your lack of courtesy i grant that for every word you speak a snake or a toad shall drop out of your mouth .
" as soon as her mother saw her returning she cried out , " well , daughter !
"" well , mother ?"
replied the rude girl .
as she spoke two vipers and two toads fell from her mouth ." heavens !"
cried the mother .
" what do i see ?
her sister is the cause of this .
she will pay for it !
" off she ran to beat her , but the poor child ran off and escaped into the woods nearby .
the king ' s son met her on his way home from hunting , and noticing how beautiful she was , he asked her what she was doing there all alone , and why she was crying .
" alas , sir , my mother has driven me from home .
" as she spoke the king ' s son saw five or six pearls and as many diamonds fall from her mouth .
he begged her to tell him how this came about , and she told him the whole story . the king ' s son fell in love with her , and considering that such a gift as had been bestowed upon her was worth more than any dowry that he might receive from someone else , he took her to his father ' s royal palace , where he married her . as for her sister , she made herself so hateful that her own mother drove her out of the house .
no one would take in the miserable girl , so at last she went into a corner of the woods and died . moral : diamonds and gold coins may work some wonders in their way ; but a gentle word is worth more than all the gems on earth . another moral : though -- when otherwise inclined -- it ' s a trouble to be kind , often it will bring you good when you least believed it could .
