once there was a gentleman who married , for his second wife , the proudest and most haughty woman that was ever seen .
she had , by a former husband , two daughters of her own , who were , indeed , exactly like her in all things .
he had likewise , by another wife , a young daughter , but of unparalleled goodness and sweetness of temper , which she took from her mother , who was the best creature in the world . no sooner were the ceremonies of the wedding over but the stepmother began to show herself in her true colors .
she could not bear the good qualities of this pretty girl , and the less because they made her own daughters appear the more odious .
she employed her in the meanest work of the house .
she scoured the dishes , tables , etc ., and cleaned madam ' s chamber , and those of misses , her daughters .
she slept in a sorry garret , on a wretched straw bed , while her sisters slept in fine rooms , with floors all inlaid , on beds of the very newest fashion , and where they had looking glasses so large that they could see themselves at their full length from head to foot . the poor girl bore it all patiently , and dared not tell her father , who would have scolded her ; for his wife governed him entirely .
when she had done her work , she used to go to the chimney corner , and sit down there in the cinders and ashes , which caused her to be called cinderwench .
only the younger sister , who was not so rude and uncivil as the older one , called her cinderella .
however , cinderella , notwithstanding her coarse apparel , was a hundred times more beautiful than her sisters , although they were always dressed very richly . it happened that the king ' s son gave a ball , and invited all persons of fashion to it .
our young misses were also invited , for they cut a very grand figure among those of quality .
they were mightily delighted at this invitation , and wonderfully busy in selecting the gowns , petticoats , and hair dressing that would best become them .
this was a new difficulty for cinderella ; for it was she who ironed her sister ' s linen and pleated their ruffles .
they talked all day long of nothing but how they should be dressed .
" for my part ," said the eldest , " i will wear my red velvet suit with french trimming .
"" and i ," said the youngest , " shall have my usual petticoat ; but then , to make amends for that , i will put on my gold - flowered cloak , and my diamond stomacher , which is far from being the most ordinary one in the world .
" they sent for the best hairdresser they could get to make up their headpieces and adjust their hairdos , and they had their red brushes and patches from mademoiselle de la poche . they also consulted cinderella in all these matters , for she had excellent ideas , and her advice was always good .
indeed , she even offered her services to fix their hair , which they very willingly accepted .
as she was doing this , they said to her , " cinderella , would you not like to go to the ball ?"" alas !"
said she , " you only jeer me ; it is not for such as i am to go to such a place .
"" you are quite right ," they replied .
" it would make the people laugh to see a cinderwench at a ball .
" anyone but cinderella would have fixed their hair awry , but she was very good , and dressed them perfectly well .
they were so excited that they hadn ' t eaten a thing for almost two days .
then they broke more than a dozen laces trying to have themselves laced up tightly enough to give them a fine slender shape .
they were continually in front of their looking glass .
at last the happy day came .
they went to court , and cinderella followed them with her eyes as long as she could .
when she lost sight of them , she started to cry . her godmother , who saw her all in tears , asked her what was the matter .
" i wish i could .
i wish i could ."
she was not able to speak the rest , being interrupted by her tears and sobbing . this godmother of hers , who was a fairy , said to her , " you wish that you could go to the ball ; is it not so ?
"" yes ," cried cinderella , with a great sigh .
" well ," said her godmother , " be but a good girl , and i will contrive that you shall go ."
then she took her into her chamber , and said to her , " run into the garden , and bring me a pumpkin .
" cinderella went immediately to gather the finest she could get , and brought it to her godmother , not being able to imagine how this pumpkin could help her go to the ball .
her godmother scooped out all the inside of it , leaving nothing but the rind .
having done this , she struck the pumpkin with her wand , and it was instantly turned into a fine coach , gilded all over with gold . she then went to look into her mousetrap , where she found six mice , all alive , and ordered cinderella to lift up a little the trapdoor .
she gave each mouse , as it went out , a little tap with her wand , and the mouse was that moment turned into a fine horse , which altogether made a very fine set of six horses of a beautiful mouse colored dapple gray . being at a loss for a coachman , cinderella said , " i will go and see if there is not a rat in the rat trap that we can turn into a coachman .
"" you are right ," replied her godmother , " go and look .
" cinderella brought the trap to her , and in it there were three huge rats .
the fairy chose the one which had the largest beard , touched him with her wand , and turned him into a fat , jolly coachman , who had the smartest whiskers that eyes ever beheld . after that , she said to her , " go again into the garden , and you will find six lizards behind the watering pot .
bring them to me .
" she had no sooner done so but her godmother turned them into six footmen , who skipped up immediately behind the coach , with their liveries all bedaubed with gold and silver , and clung as close behind each other as if they had done nothing else their whole lives .
the fairy then said to cinderella , " well , you see here an equipage fit to go to the ball with ; are you not pleased with it ?
"" oh , yes ," she cried ; " but must i go in these nasty rags ?
" her godmother then touched her with her wand , and , at the same instant , her clothes turned into cloth of gold and silver , all beset with jewels .
this done , she gave her a pair of glass slippers , the prettiest in the whole world .
being thus decked out , she got up into her coach ; but her godmother , above all things , commanded her not to stay past midnight , telling her , at the same time , that if she stayed one moment longer , the coach would be a pumpkin again , her horses mice , her coachman a rat , her footmen lizards , and that her clothes would become just as they were before . she promised her godmother to leave the ball before midnight ; and then drove away , scarcely able to contain herself for joy .
the king ' s son , who was told that a great princess , whom nobody knew , had arrived , ran out to receive her .
he gave her his hand as she alighted from the coach , and led her into the hall , among all the company .
there was immediately a profound silence .
everyone stopped dancing , and the violins ceased to play , so entranced was everyone with the singular beauties of the unknown newcomer . nothing was then heard but a confused noise of , " how beautiful she is !
how beautiful she is !
" the king himself , old as he was , could not help watching her , and telling the queen softly that it was a long time since he had seen so beautiful and lovely a creature . all the ladies were busied in considering her clothes and headdress , hoping to have some made next day after the same pattern , provided they could find such fine materials and as able hands to make them . the king ' s son led her to the most honorable seat , and afterwards took her out to dance with him .
she danced so very gracefully that they all more and more admired her .
a fine meal was served up , but the young prince ate not a morsel , so intently was he busied in gazing on her . she went and sat down by her sisters , showing them a thousand civilities , giving them part of the oranges and citrons which the prince had presented her with , which very much surprised them , for they did not know her .
while cinderella was thus amusing her sisters , she heard the clock strike eleven and three - quarters , whereupon she immediately made a courtesy to the company and hurried away as fast as she could . arriving home , she ran to seek out her godmother , and , after having thanked her , she said she could not but heartily wish she might go to the ball the next day as well , because the king ' s son had invited her . as she was eagerly telling her godmother everything that had happened at the ball , her two sisters knocked at the door , which cinderella ran and opened .
" you stayed such a long time !"
she cried , gaping , rubbing her eyes and stretching herself as if she had been sleeping ; she had not , however , had any manner of inclination to sleep while they were away from home .
" if you had been at the ball ," said one of her sisters , " you would not have been tired with it .
the finest princess was there , the most beautiful that mortal eyes have ever seen .
she showed us a thousand civilities , and gave us oranges and citrons .
" cinderella seemed very indifferent in the matter .
indeed , she asked them the name of that princess ; but they told her they did not know it , and that the king ' s son was very uneasy on her account and would give all the world to know who she was .
at this cinderella , smiling , replied , " she must , then , be very beautiful indeed ; how happy you have been !
could not i see her ?
ah , dear charlotte , do lend me your yellow dress which you wear every day .
"" yes , to be sure !"
cried charlotte ; " lend my clothes to such a dirty cinderwench as you are !
i should be such a fool .
" cinderella , indeed , well expected such an answer , and was very glad of the refusal ; for she would have been sadly put to it , if her sister had lent her what she asked for jestingly . the next day the two sisters were at the ball , and so was cinderella , but dressed even more magnificently than before .
the king ' s son was always by her , and never ceased his compliments and kind speeches to her .
all this was so far from being tiresome to her , and , indeed , she quite forgot what her godmother had told her .
she thought that it was no later than eleven when she counted the clock striking twelve .
she jumped up and fled , as nimble as a deer .
the prince followed , but could not overtake her .
she left behind one of her glass slippers , which the prince picked up most carefully .
she reached home , but quite out of breath , and in her nasty old clothes , having nothing left of all her finery but one of the little slippers , the mate to the one that she had dropped . the guards at the palace gate were asked if they had not seen a princess go out .
they replied that they had seen nobody leave but a young girl , very shabbily dressed , and who had more the air of a poor country wench than a gentlewoman . when the two sisters returned from the ball cinderella asked them if they had been well entertained , and if the fine lady had been there . they told her , yes , but that she hurried away immediately when it struck twelve , and with so much haste that she dropped one of her little glass slippers , the prettiest in the world , which the king ' s son had picked up ; that he had done nothing but look at her all the time at the ball , and that most certainly he was very much in love with the beautiful person who owned the glass slipper . what they said was very true ; for a few days later , the king ' s son had it proclaimed , by sound of trumpet , that he would marry her whose foot this slipper would just fit .
they began to try it on the princesses , then the duchesses and all the court , but in vain ; it was brought to the two sisters , who did all they possibly could to force their foot into the slipper , but they did not succeed . cinderella , who saw all this , and knew that it was her slipper , said to them , laughing , " let me see if it will not fit me .
" her sisters burst out laughing , and began to banter with her .
the gentleman who was sent to try the slipper looked earnestly at cinderella , and , finding her very handsome , said that it was only just that she should try as well , and that he had orders to let everyone try . he had cinderella sit down , and , putting the slipper to her foot , he found that it went on very easily , fitting her as if it had been made of wax .
her two sisters were greatly astonished , but then even more so , when cinderella pulled out of her pocket the other slipper , and put it on her other foot .
then in came her godmother and touched her wand to cinderella ' s clothes , making them richer and more magnificent than any of those she had worn before . and now her two sisters found her to be that fine , beautiful lady whom they had seen at the ball .
they threw themselves at her feet to beg pardon for all the ill treatment they had made her undergo .
cinderella took them up , and , as she embraced them , said that she forgave them with all her heart , and wanted them always to love her . she was taken to the young prince , dressed as she was .
he thought she was more charming than before , and , a few days after , married her .
cinderella , who was no less good than beautiful , gave her two sisters lodgings in the palace , and that very same day matched them with two great lords of the court . moral : beauty in a woman is a rare treasure that will always be admired .
graciousness , however , is priceless and of even greater value .
this is what cinderella ' s godmother gave to her when she taught her to behave like a queen .
young women , in the winning of a heart , graciousness is more important than a beautiful hairdo .
it is a true gift of the fairies .
without it nothing is possible ; with it , one can do anything . another moral : without doubt it is a great advantage to have intelligence , courage , good breeding , and common sense .
these , and similar talents come only from heaven , and it is good to have them .
however , even these may fail to bring you success , without the blessing of a godfather or a godmother .
