there once lived a great lord , who was blessed with the birth of a daughter , whom he named talia .
he sent for the wise men and astrologers in his lands , to predict her future .
they met , counseled together , and cast her horoscope , and at length they came to the conclusion that she would incur great danger from a splinter of flax .
her father therefore forbade that any flax , hemp , or any other material of that sort be brought into his house , so that she should escape the predestined danger . one day , when talia had grown into a young and beautiful lady , she was looking out of a window , when she beheld passing that way an old woman , who was spinning .
talia , never having seen a distaff or a spindle , was pleased to see the twirling spindle , and she was so curious as to what thing it was , that she asked the old woman to come to her .
taking the distaff from her hand , she began to stretch the flax .
unfortunately , talia ran a splinter of flax under her nail , and she fell dead upon the ground .
when the old woman saw this , she became frightened and ran down the stairs , and is running still . as soon as the wretched father heard of the disaster which had taken place , he had them , after having paid for this tub of sour wine with casks of tears , lay her out in one of his country mansions .
there they seated her on a velvet throne under a canopy of brocade .
wanting to forget all and to drive from his memory his great misfortune , he closed the doors and abandoned forever the house where he had suffered this great loss . after a time , it happened by chance that a king was out hunting and passed that way .
one of his falcons escaped from his hand and flew into the house by way of one of the windows .
it did not come when called , so the king had one of his party knock at the door , believing the palace to be inhabited .
although he knocked for a length of time , nobody answered , so the king had them bring a vintner ' s ladder , for he himself would climb up and search the house , to discover what was inside .
thus he climbed up and entered , and looked in all the rooms , and nooks , and corners , and was amazed to find no living person there .
at last he came to the salon , and when the king beheld talia , who seemed to be enchanted , he believed that she was asleep , and he called her , but she remained unconscious .
crying aloud , he beheld her charms and felt his blood course hotly through his veins .
he lifted her in his arms , and carried her to a bed , where he gathered the first fruits of love .
leaving her on the bed , he returned to his own kingdom , where , in the pressing business of his realm , he for a time thought no more about this incident . now after nine months talia delivered two beautiful children , one a boy and the other a girl .
in them could be seen two rare jewels , and they were attended by two fairies , who came to that palace , and put them at their mother ' s breasts .
once , however , they sought the nipple , and not finding it , began to suck on talia ' s fingers , and they sucked so much that the splinter of flax came out .
talia awoke as if from a long sleep , and seeing beside her two priceless gems , she held them to her breast , and gave them the nipple to suck , and the babies were dearer to her than her own life .
finding herself alone in that palace with two children by her side , she did not know what had happened to her ; but she did notice that the table was set , and food and drink were brought in to her , although she did not see any attendants . in the meanwhile the king remembered talia , and saying that he wanted to go hunting , he returned to the palace , and found her awake , and with two cupids of beauty .
he was overjoyed , and he told talia who he was , and how he had seen her , and what had taken place .
when she heard this , their friendship was knitted with tighter bonds , and he remained with her for a few days .
after that time he bade her farewell , and promised to return soon , and take her with him to his kingdom .
and he went to his realm , but he could not find any rest , and at all hours he had in his mouth the names of talia , and of sun and moon ( those were the two children ' s names ), and when he took his rest , he called either one or other of them . now the king ' s wife began to suspect that something was wrong from the delay of her husband while hunting , and hearing him name continually talia , sun , and moon , she became hot with another kind of heat than the sun ' s .
sending for the secretary , she said to him , " listen to me , my son , you are living between two rocks , between the post and the door , between the poker and the grate .
if you will tell me with whom the king your master , and my husband , is in love , i will give you treasures untold ; and if you hide the truth from me , you will never be found again , dead or alive ."
the man was terribly frightened .
greed and fear blinded his eyes to all honor and to all sense of justice , and he related to her all things , calling bread bread , and wine wine . the queen , hearing how matters stood , sent the secretary to talia , in the name of the king , asking her to send the children , for he wished to see them .
talia , with great joy , did as she was commanded .
then the queen , with a heart of medea , told the cook to kill them , and to make them into several tasteful dishes for her wretched husband .
but the cook was tender hearted and , seeing these two beautiful golden apples , felt pity and compassion for them , and he carried them home to his wife , and had her hide them .
in their place he prepared two lambs into a hundred different dishes .
when the king came , the queen , with great pleasure , had the food served . the king ate with delight , saying , " by the life of lanfusa , how tasteful this is "; or , " by the soul of my ancestors , this is good .
" each time she replied , " eat , eat , you are eating of your own .
" for two or three times the king paid no attention to this repetition , but at last seeing that the music continued , he answered , " i know perfectly well that i am eating of my own , because you have brought nothing into this house "; and growing angry , he got up and went to a villa at some distance from his palace , to solace his soul and alleviate his anger . in the meanwhile the queen , not being satisfied of the evil already done , sent for the secretary and told him to go to the palace and to bring talia back , saying that the king longed for her presence and was expecting her .
talia departed as soon as she heard these words , believing that she was following the commands of her lord , for she greatly longed to see her light and joy , knowing not what was preparing for her .
she was met by the queen , whose face glowed from the fierce fire burning inside her , and looked like the face of nero . she addressed her thus , " welcome , madam busybody !
you are a fine piece of goods , you ill weed , who are enjoying my husband .
so you are the lump of filth , the cruel bitch , that has caused my head to spin ?
change your ways , for you are welcome in purgatory , where i will compensate you for all the damage you have done to me .
" talia , hearing these words , began to excuse herself , saying that it was not her fault , because the king her husband had taken possession of her territory when she was drowned in sleep ; but the queen would not listen to her excuses , and had a large fire lit in the courtyard of the palace , and commanded that talia should be cast into it . the lady , perceiving that matters had taken a bad turn , knelt before the queen , and begged her to allow her at least to take off the garments she wore .
the queen , not for pity of the unhappy lady , but to gain also those robes , which were embroidered with gold and pearls , told her to undress , saying , " you can take off your clothes .
i agree ."
talia began to take them off , and with every item that she removed she uttered a loud scream .
having taken off her robe , her skirt , the bodice , and her shift , she was on the point of removing her last garment , when she uttered a last scream louder than the rest .
they dragged her towards the pile , to reduce her to lye ashes which would be used to wash charon ' s breeches . the king suddenly appeared , and finding this spectacle , demanded to know what was happening .
he asked for his children , and his wife -- reproaching him for his treachery -- told him that she had had them slaughtered and served to him as meat .
when the wretched king heard this , he gave himself up to despair , saying , " alas !
then i , myself , am the wolf of my own sweet lambs .
alas !
and why did these my veins know not the fountains of their own blood ?
you renegade bitch , what evil deed is this which you have done ?
begone , you shall get your desert as the stumps , and i will not send such a tyrant - faced one to the colosseum to do her penance !
" so saying , he commanded that the queen should be cast into the fire which she had prepared for talia , and the secretary with her , because he had been the handle for this bitter play , and weaver of this wicked plot .
he was going to do the same with the cook , whom he believed to be the slaughterer of his children , when the man cast himself at his feet , saying , " in truth , my lord , for such a deed , there should be nothing else than a pile of living fire , and no other help than a spear from behind , and no other entertainment than twisting and turning within the blazing fire , and i should seek no other honor than to have my ashes , the ashes of a cook , mixed up with the queen ' s .
but this is not the reward that i expect for having saved the children , in spite of the gall of that bitch , who wanted to kill them and to return to your body that which was of your own body .
" hearing these words , the king was beside himself .
he thought he was dreaming , and he could not believe what his own ears had heard .
therefore , turning to the cook , he said , " if it is true that you have saved my children , be sure that i will take you away from turning the spit , and i will put you in the kitchen of this breast , to turn and twist as you like all my desires , giving you such a reward as shall enable you to call yourself a happy man in this world .
" while the king spoke these words , the cook ' s wife , seeing her husband ' s need , brought forth the two children , sun and moon , before their father .
and he never tired at playing the game of three with his wife and children , making a mill wheel of kisses , now with one and then with the other .
he gave a generous reward to the cook , he made him a chamberlain .
he married talia to wife ; and she enjoyed a long life with her husband and her children , thus experiencing the truth of the proverb : those whom fortune favors find good luck even in their sleep .
