he who gives pleasure meets with it : kindness is the bond of friendship and the hook of love : he who sows not reaps not ; of which truth ciulla has given you the foretaste of example , and i will give you the dessert , if you will bear in mind what cato says , " speak little at table ."
therefore have the kindness to lend me your ears awhile ; and may heaven cause them to stretch continually , to listen to pleasant and amusing things . there was once in the county of arzano a good woman who every year gave birth to a son , until at length there were seven of them , who looked like the pipes of the god pan , with seven reeds , one larger than another .
and when they had changed their first teeth , they said to jannetella their mother , " hark ye , mother , if , after so many sons , you do not this time have a daughter , we are resolved to leave home , and go wandering through the world like the sons of the blackbirds .
" when their mother heard this sad announcement , she prayed heaven to remove such an intention from her sons , and prevent her losing seven such jewels as they were .
and when the hour of the birth was at hand , the sons said to jannetella , " we will retire to the top of yonder hill or rock opposite ; if you give birth to a son , put an inkstand and a pen up at the window ; but if you have a little girl , put up a spoon and a distaff .
for if we see the signal of a daughter , we shall return home and spend the rest of our lives under your wings ; but if we see the signal of a son , then forget us , for you may know that we have taken ourselves off .
" soon after the sons had departed it pleased heaven that jannetella should bring forth a pretty little daughter ; then she told the nurse to make the signal to the brothers , but the woman was so stupid and confused that she put up the inkstand and the pen .
as soon as the seven brothers saw this signal , they set off , and walked on and on , until at the end of three years they came to a wood , where the trees were performing the sword - dance to the sound of a river which made music upon the stones .
in this wood was the house of an ogre whose eyes having been blinded whilst asleep by a woman , he was such an enemy to the sex that he devoured all whom he could catch . when the youths arrived at the ogre ' s house , tired out with walking and exhausted with hunger , they begged him for pity ' s sake to give them a morsel of bread .
and the ogre replied that if they would serve him he would give them food , and they would have nothing else to do but to watch over him like a dog , each in turn for a day .
the youths , upon hearing this , thought they had found father and mother ; so they consented , and remained in the service of the ogre , who , having gotten their names by heart , called once for giangrazio , at another time for cecchitiello , now for pascale , now nuccio , now pone , now pezzillo , and now carcavecchia , for so the brothers were named ; and giving them a room in the lower part of the house , he allowed them enough to live upon . meanwhile their sister had grown up ; and hearing that her seven brothers , owing to the stupidity of the nurse , had set out to walk through the world , and that no tidings of them had ever been received , she took it into her head to go in search of them .
and she begged and prayed her mother so long , that at last , overcome by her entreaties , she gave her leave to go , and dressed her like a pilgrim .
then the maiden walked and walked , asking at every place she came to whether any one had seen seven brothers .
and thus she journeyed on , until at length she got news of them at an inn , where having enquired the way to the wood , one morning , at the hour when the sun with the penknife of his rays scratches out the inkspots made by night upon the sheet of heaven , she arrived at the ogre ' s house , where she was recognised by her brothers with great joy , who cursed the inkstand and the pen for writing falsely such misfortune for them .
then giving her a thousand caresses , they told her to remain quiet in their chamber , that the ogre might not see her ; bidding her at the same time give a portion of whatever she had to eat to a cat which was in the room , or otherwise she would do her some harm .
cianna ( for so the sister was named ) wrote down this advice in the pocket - book of her heart , and shared everything with the cat , like a good companion , always cutting justly , and saying , " this for me -- this for thee ,-- this for the daughter of the king ," giving the cat a share to the last morsel . now it happened one day that the brothers , going to hunt for the ogre , left cianna a little basket of chick - peas to cook ; and as she was picking them , by ill - luck she found among them a hazel - nut , which was the stone of disturbance to her quiet ; for having swallowed it without giving half to the cat , the latter out of spite jumped on the table and blew out the candle .
cianna seeing this , and not knowing what to do , left the room , contrary to the command of her brothers , and going into the ogre ' s chamber begged him for a little light .
then the ogre , hearing a woman ' s voice , said , " welcome , madam !
wait awhile ,-- you have found what you are seeking ."
and so saying he took a genoa stone , and daubing it with oil he fell to whetting his tusks .
but cianna , who saw the cart on a wrong track , seizing a lighted stick ran to her chamber ; and bolting the door inside , she placed against it bars , stools , bedsteads , tables , stones , and everything there was in the room . as soon as the ogre had put an edge on his teeth he ran to the chamber of the brothers , and finding the door fastened , he fell to kicking it to break it open .
at this noise and disturbance the seven brothers at once came home , and hearing themselves accused by the ogre of treachery for making their chamber a refuge for one of his women enemies , giangrazio , who was the eldest and had more sense than the others , and saw matters going badly , said to the ogre , " we know nothing of this affair , and it may be that this wicked woman has perchance come into the room whilst we were at the chase ; but as she has fortified herself inside , come with me and i will take you to a place where we can seize her without her being able to defend herself .
" then they took the ogre by the hand , and led him to a deep , deep pit , where , giving him a push , they sent him headlong to the bottom ; and taking a shovel , which they found on the ground , they covered him with earth .
then they bade their sister unfasten the door , and they rated her soundly for the fault she had committed , and the danger in which she had placed herself ; telling her to be more careful in future , and to beware of plucking grass upon the spot where the ogre was buried , or they would be turned into seven doves .
" heaven keep me from bringing such a misfortune upon you !"
replied cianna .
so taking possession of all the ogre ' s goods and chattels , and making themselves masters of the whole house , they lived there merrily enough , waiting until winter should pass away , and the sun , on taking possession of the house of the bull , give a present to the earth of a green gown embroidered with flowers , when they might set out on their journey home . now it happened one day , when the brothers were gone to the mountains to get firewood to defend themselves against the cold , which increased from day to day , that a poor pilgrim came to the ogre ' s wood , and made faces at an ape that was perched up in a pine - tree ; whereupon the ape threw down one of the fir - apples from the tree upon the man ' s pate , which made such a terrible bump that the poor fellow set up a loud cry .
cianna hearing the noise went out , and taking pity on his disaster , she quickly plucked a sprig of rosemary from a tuft which grew upon the ogre ' s grave ; then she made him a plaster of it with boiled bread and salt , and after giving the man some breakfast she sent him away . whilst cianna was laying the cloth , and expecting her brothers , lo !
she saw seven doves come flying , who said to her , " ah !
better that your hand had been cut off , you cause of all our misfortune , ere it plucked that accursed rosemary and brought such a calamity upon us !
have you eaten the brains of a cat , o sister , that you have driven our advice from your mind ?
behold us , turned to birds , a prey to the talons of kites , hawks , and falcons !
behold us made companions of water - hens , snipes , goldfinches , woodpeckers , jays , owls , magpies , jackdaws , rooks , starlings , woodcocks , cocks , hens and chickens , turkey - cocks , blackbirds , thrushes , chaffinches , tomtits , jenny - wrens , lapwings , linnets , greenfinches , crossbills , flycatchers , larks , plovers , kingfishers , wagtails , redbreasts , redfinches , sparrows , ducks , fieldfares , woodpigeons and bullfinches !
a rare thing you have done !
and now we may return to our country to find nets laid and twigs limed for us !
to heal the head of a pilgrim , you have broken the heads of seven brothers ; nor is there any help for our misfortune , unless you find the mother of time , who will tell you the way to get us out of trouble .
" cianna , looking like a plucked quail at the fault she had committed , begged pardon of her brothers , and offered to go round the world until she should find the dwelling of the old woman .
then praying them not to stir from the house until she returned , lest any ill should betide them , she set out , and journeyed on and on without ever tiring ; and though she went on foot , her desire to aid her brothers served her as a sumpter - mule , with which she made three miles an hour .
at last she came to the seashore , where with the blows of the waves the sea was banging the rocks which would not repeat the latin it gave them to do .
here she saw a huge whale , who said to her , " my pretty maiden , what go you seeking ?"
and she replied , " i am seeking the dwelling of the mother of time ."
" hear then what you must do ," replied the whale ; " go straight along this shore , and on coming to the first river , follow it up to its source , and you will meet with some one who will show you the way : but do me one kindness ,-- when you find the good old woman , beg of her the favour to tell me some means by which i may swim about safely , without so often knocking upon the rocks and being thrown on the sands .
"" trust to me ," said cianna , then thanking the whale for pointing out the way , she set off walking along the shore ; and after a long journey she came to the river , which like a clerk of the treasury was disbursing silver money into the bank of the sea .
then taking the way up to its source , she arrived at a beautiful open country , where the meadow vied with the heaven , displaying her green mantle starred over with flowers ; and there she met a mouse who said to her , " whither are you going thus alone , my pretty girl ?"
and cianna replied , " i am seeking the mother of time .
"" you have a long way to go ," said the mouse ; " but do not lose heart , everything has an end .
walk on , therefore , toward yon mountains , which , like the free lords of these fields , assume the title of highness , and you will soon have more news of what you are seeking .
but do me one favour ,-- when you arrive at the house you wish to find , get the good old woman to tell you what you can do to rid us of the tyranny of the cats ; then command me , and i am your slave .
" cianna , after promising to do the mouse this kindness , set off towards the mountains , which , although they appeared to be close at hand , seemed never to be reached .
but having come to them at length , she sat down tired out upon a stone ; and there she saw an army of ants , carrying a large store of grain , one of whom turning to cianna said , " who art thou , and whither art thou going ?"
and cianna , who was courteous to every one , said to her , " i am an unhappy girl , who , for a matter that concerns me , am seeking the dwelling of the mother of time .
"" go on farther ," said the ant , " and where these mountains open into a large plain you will obtain more news .
but do me a great favour ,-- get the secret from the old woman , what we ants can do to live a little longer ; for it seems to me a folly in worldly affairs to be heaping up such a large store of food for so short a life , which , like an auctioneer ' s candle , goes out just at the best bidding of years .
"" be at ease ," said cianna , " i will return the kindness you have shown me .
" then she passed the mountains and arrived at a wide plain ; and proceeding a little way over it , she came to a large oak - tree ,-- a memorial of antiquity , whose fruit ( a mouthful which time gives to this bitter age of its lost sweetness ) tasted like sweetmeats to the maiden , who was satisfied with little .
then the oak , making lips of its bark and a tongue of its pith , said to cianna , " whither are you going so sad , my little daughter ?
come and rest under my shade ."
cianna thanked him much , but excused herself , saying that she was going in haste to find the mother of time .
and when the oak heard this he replied , " you are not far from her dwelling ; for before you have gone another day ' s journey , you will see upon a mountain a house , in which you will find her whom you seek .
but if you have as much kindness as beauty , i prithee learn for me what i can do to regain my lost honour ; for instead of being food for great men , i am now only made the food of hogs .
"" leave that to me ," replied cianna , " i will take care to serve you ."
so saying , she departed , and walking on and on without ever resting , she came at length to the foot of an impertinent mountain , which was poking its head into the face of the clouds .
there she found an old man , who , wearied and wayworn , had lain down upon some hay ; and as soon as he saw cianna , he knew her at once , and that it was she who had cured his bump . when the old man heard what she was seeking , he told her that he was carrying to time the rent for the piece of earth which he had cultivated , and that time was a tyrant who usurped everything in the world , claiming tribute from all , and especially from people of his age ; and he added that , having received kindness from cianna , he would now return it a hundredfold by giving her some good information about her arrival at the mountain ; and that he was sorry he could not accompany her thither , since his old age , which was condemned rather to go down than up , obliged him to remain at the foot of those mountains , to cast up accounts with the clerks of time -- which are the labours , the sufferings , and the infirmities of life -- and to pay the debt of nature .
so the old man said to her , " now , my pretty , innocent child , listen to me .
you must know that on the top of this mountain you will find a ruined house , which was built long ago , time out of mind .
the walls are cracked , the foundations crumbling away , the doors worm - eaten , the furniture all worn out -- and , in short , everything is gone to wrack and ruin .
on one side are seen shattered columns , on another broken statues ; and nothing is left in a good state except a coat - of - arms over the door , quartered on which you will see a serpent biting its tail , a stag , a raven , and a phoenix .
when you enter , you will see on the ground , files , saws , scythes , sickles , pruning - hooks , and hundreds and hundreds of vessels full of ashes , with the names written on them , like gallipots in an apothecary ' s shop ; and there may be read corinth , saguntum , carthage , troy , and a thousand other cities , the ashes of which time preserved as trophies of his conquests .
" when you come near the house , hide yourself until time goes out ; and as soon as he has gone forth , enter , and you will find an old , old woman , with a beard that touches the ground and a hump reaching to the sky .
her hair , like the tail of a dapple - grey horse , covers her heels ; her face looks like a plaited collar , with the folds stiffened by the starch of years .
the old woman is seated upon a clock , which is fastened to a wall ; and her eyebrows are so large that they overshadow her eyes , so that she will not be able to see you .
as soon as you enter , quickly take the weights off the clock , then call to the old woman , and beg her to answer your questions ; whereupon she will instantly call her son to come and eat you up .
but the clock upon which the old woman sits having lost its weights , her son cannot move , and she will therefore be obliged to tell you what you wish .
but do not trust any oath she may make , unless she swears by the wings of her son , and you will be content .
" so saying , the poor old man fell down and crumbled away , like a dead body brought from a catacomb to the light of day .
then cianna took the ashes , and mixing them with a pint of tears , she made a grave and buried them , praying heaven to grant them quiet and repose .
and ascending the mountain till she was quite out of breath , she waited until time came out , who was an old man with a long , long beard , and who wore a very old cloak covered with slips of paper , on which were worked the names of various people .
he had large wings , and ran so fast that he was out of sight in an instant . when cianna entered the house of his mother , she started with affright at the sight of that black old chip ; and instantly seizing the weights of the clock , she told what she wanted to the old woman , who , setting up a loud cry , called to her son .
but cianna said to her , " you may butt your head against the wall as long as you like , for you will not see your son whilst i hold these clock - weights .
" thereupon the old woman , seeing herself foiled , began to coax cianna , saying , " let go of them , my dear , and do not stop my son ' s course ; for no man living has ever done that .
let go of them , and may heaven preserve you !
for i promise you , by the acid of my son , with which he corrodes everything , that i will do you no harm .
"" that ' s time lost ," answered cianna , " you must say something better if you would have me quit my hold .
"" i swear to you by those teeth , which gnaw all mortal things , that i will tell you all you desire .
"" that is all nothing ," answered cianna , " for i know you are deceiving me .
"" well , then ," said the old woman , " i swear to you by those wings which fly over all that i will give you more pleasure than you imagine .
" thereupon cianna , letting go the weights , kissed the old woman ' s hand , which had a mouldy feel and a nasty smell .
and the old woman , seeing the courtesy of the damsel , said to her , " hide yourself behind this door , and when time comes home i will make him tell me all you wish to know .
and as soon as he goes out again -- for he never stays quiet in one place -- you can depart .
but do not let yourself be heard or seen , for he is such a glutton that he does not spare even his own children ; and when all fails , he devours himself and then springs up anew .
" cianna did as the old woman told her ; and , lo !
soon after time came flying quick , quick , high and light , and having gnawed whatever came to hand , down to the very mouldiness upon the walls , he was about to depart , when his mother told him all she had heard from cianna , beseeching him by the milk she had given him to answer exactly all her questions .
after a thousand entreaties , her son replied , " to the tree may be answered , that it can never be prized by men so long as it keeps treasures buried under its roots ; to the mice , that they will never be safe from the cat unless they tie a bell to her leg to tell them when she is coming ; to the ants , that they will live a hundred years if they can dispense with flying -- for when the ant is going to die she puts on wings ; to the whale , that it should be of good cheer , and make friends with the sea - mouse , who will serve him as a guide , so that he will never go wrong ; and to the doves , that when they alight on the column of wealth , they will return to their former state .
" so saying , time set out to run his accustomed post ; and cianna , taking leave of the old woman , descended to the foot of the mountain , just at the very time that the seven doves , who had followed their sister ' s footsteps , arrived there .
wearied with flying so far , they stopped to rest upon the horn of a dead ox ; and no sooner had they alighted than they were changed into handsome youths as they were at first .
but while they were marvelling at this , they heard the reply which time had given , and saw at once that the horn , as the symbol of plenty , was the column of wealth of which time had spoken .
then embracing their sister with great joy , they all set out on the same road by which cianna had come .
and when they came to the oak - tree , and told it what cianna had heard from time , the tree begged them to take away the treasure from its roots , since it was the cause why its acorns had lost their reputation .
thereupon the seven brothers , taking a spade which they found in a garden , dug and dug , until they came to a great heap of gold money , which they divided into eight parts and shared among themselves and their sister , so that they might carry it away conveniently .
but being wearied with the journey and the load , they laid themselves down to sleep under a hedge .
presently a band of robbers coming by , and seeing the poor fellows asleep , with their heads upon the clothfuls of money , bound them hand and foot to some trees and took away their money , leaving them to bewail not only their wealth -- which had slipped through their fingers as soon as found -- but their life ; for being without hope of succour , they were in peril of either soon dying of hunger or allaying the hunger of some wild beast . as they were lamenting their unhappy lot , up came the mouse , who , as soon as she heard the reply which time had given , in return for the good service , nibbled the cords with which they were bound and set them free .
and having gone a little way farther , they met on the road the ant , who , when she heard the advice of time , asked cianna what was the matter that she was so pale - faced and cast down .
and when cianna told her their misfortune , and the trick which the robbers had played them , the ant replied , " be quiet , i can now requite the kindness you have done me .
you must know , that whilst i was carrying a load of grain underground , i saw a place where these dogs of assassins hide their plunder .
they have made some holes under an old building , in which they shut up all the things they have stolen .
they are just now gone out for some new robbery , and i will go with you and show you the place , so that you may recover your money .
" so saying , she took the way towards some tumbled - down houses , and showed the seven brothers the mouth of the pit ; whereupon giangrazio , who was bolder than the rest , entering it , found there all the money of which they had been robbed .
then taking it with them , they set out , and walked towards the seashore , where they found the whale , and told him the good advice which time -- who is the father of counsel -- had given them .
and whilst they stood talking of their journey and all that had befallen them , they saw the robbers suddenly appear , armed to the teeth , who had followed in their footsteps .
at this sight they exclaimed , " alas , alas !
we are now wholly lost , for here come the robbers armed , and they will not leave the skin on our bodies .
"" fear not ," replied the whale , " for i can save you out of the fire , and will thus requite the love you have shown me ; so get upon my back , and i will quickly carry you to a place of safety .
" cianna and her brothers , seeing the foe at their heels and the water up to their throats , climbed upon the whale , who , keeping far off from the rocks , carried them to within sight of naples .
but being afraid to land them on account of the shoals and shallows , he said , " where would you like me to land you ?
on the shore of amalfi ?"
and giangrazio answered , " see whether that cannot be avoided , my dear fish .
i do not wish to land at any place hereabouts ; for at massa they say barely good - day , at sorrento thieves are plenty , at vico they say you may go your way , at castel - a - mare no one says how are ye .
" then the whale , to please them , turned about and went toward the salt - rock , where he left them ; and they got put on shore by the first fishing - boat that passed .
thereupon they returned to their own country , safe and sound and rich , to the great joy and consolation of their mother and father .
and , thanks to the goodness of cianna , they enjoyed a happy life , verifying the old saying --" do good whenever you can , and forget it ."
