resolutions taken without thought bring disasters without remedy .
he who behaves like a fool repents like a wise man ; as happened to the king of high - hill , who through unexampled folly committed an act of madness putting in jeopardy both his daughter and his honour . once upon a time the king of high - hill being bitten by a flea caught him by a wonderful feat of dexterity ; and seeing how handsome and stately he was he had not the conscience to sentence him to death .
so he put him into a bottle , and feeding him every day himself the little animal grew at such a rate that at the end of seven months it was necessary to shift his quarters , for he was grown bigger than a sheep .
the king then had him flayed and his skin dressed .
then he issued a proclamation that whoever could tell what this skin was should marry the princess . as soon as this decree was made known the people flocked in crowds from all the ends of the world to try their luck .
one said that it belonged to an ape , another to a lynx , a third to a crocodile , and in short some gave it to one animal and some to another ; but they were all a hundred miles from the truth , and not one hit the nail on the head .
at last there came to this trial an ogre who was the most ugly being in the world , the very sight of whom would make the boldest man tremble and quake with fear .
but no sooner had he come and turned the skin round and smelt it than he instantly guessed the truth , saying , " this skin belongs to the king of fleas .
" now the king saw that the ogre had hit the mark ; and not to break his word he ordered his daughter porziella to be called .
porziella had a face like milk and roses , and was such a miracle of beauty that you would never be tired of looking at her .
and the king said to her , " my daughter , you know who i am .
i cannot go back from my promise whether a king or a beggar .
my word is given , i must keep it though my heart should break .
who would ever have imagined that this prize would have fallen to an ogre !
but it never does to judge hastily .
have patience then and do not oppose your father ; for my heart tells me that you will be happy , for rich treasures are often found inside a rough earthen jar .
" when porziella heard this sad saying her eyes grew dim , her face turned pale , her lips fell , her knees shook ; and at last , bursting into tears , she said to her father , " what crime have i committed that i should be punished thus !
how have i ever behaved badly toward you that i should be given up to this monster .
is this , o father , the affection you bear to your own child ?
is this the love you show to her whom you used to call the joy of your soul ?
do you drive from your sight her who is the apple of your eye ?
o father , o cruel father !
better had it been if my cradle had been my death - bed since i have lived to see this evil day .
" porziella was going on to say more when the king in a furious rage exclaimed , " stay your anger !
fair and softly , for appearances deceive .
is it for a girl to teach her father , forsooth ?
have done , i say , for if i lay these hands upon you i ' ll not leave a whole bone in your skin .
prithee , how long has a child hardly out of the nursery dared to oppose my will ?
quick then , i say , take his hand and set off with him home this very instant , for i will not have that saucy face a minute longer in my sight .
" poor porziella , seeing herself thus caught in the net , with the face of a person condemned to death , with the heart of one whose head is lying between the axe and the block , took the hand of the ogre , who dragged her off without any attendants to the wood where the trees made a palace for the meadow to prevent its being discovered by the sun , and the brooks murmured , having knocked against the stones in the dark , while the wild beasts wandered where they liked without paying toll , and went safely through the thicket whither no man ever came unless he had lost his way .
upon this spot , which was as black as an unswept chimney , stood the ogre ' s house ornamented all round with the bones of the men whom he had devoured .
think but for a moment of the horror of it to the poor girl . but this was nothing at all in comparison with what was to come .
before dinner she had peas and after dinner parched beans .
then the ogre went out to hunt and returned home laden with the quarters of the men whom he had killed , saying , " now , wife , you cannot complain that i don ' t take good care of you ; here is a fine store of eatables , take and make merry and love me well , for the sky will fall before i will let you want for food .
" poor porziella could not endure this horrible sight and turned her face away .
but when the ogre saw this he cried , " ha !
this is throwing sweetmeats before swine ; never mind , however , only have patience till to - morrow morning , for i have been invited to a wild boar hunt and will bring you home a couple of boars , and we ' ll make a grand feast with our kinsfolk and celebrate the wedding ."
so saying he went into the forest . now as porziella stood weeping at the window it chanced that an old woman passed by who , being famished with hunger , begged some food .
" ah , my good woman ," said porziella , " heaven knows i am in the power of the ogre who brings me home nothing but pieces of the men he has killed .
i pass the most miserable life possible , and yet i am the daughter of a king and have been brought up in luxury ."
and so saying she began to cry like a little girl who sees her bread and butter taken away from her . the old woman ' s heart was softened at this sight and she said to porziella , " be of good heart , my pretty girl , do not spoil your beauty with crying , for you have met with luck ; i can help you to both saddle and trappings .
listen , now .
i have seven sons who , you see , are seven giants , mase , nardo , cola , micco , petrullo , ascaddeo , and ceccone , who have more virtues that rosemary , especially mase , for every time he lays his ear to the ground he hears all that is passing within thirty miles round .
nardo , every time he washes his hands , makes a great sea of soapsuds .
every time that cola throws a bit of iron on the ground he makes a field of sharp razors .
whenever micco flings down a little stick a tangled wood springs up .
if petrullo lets fall a drop of water it makes a terrible river .
when ascaddeo wishes a strong tower to spring up he has only to throw a stone ; and ceccone shoots so straight with the cross - bow that he can hit a hen ' s eye a mile off .
now with the help of my sons , who are all courteous and friendly , and who will all take compassion on your condition , i will contrive to free you from the claws of the ogre .
"" no time better than now ," replied porziella , " for that evil shadow of a husband of mine has gone out and will not return this evening , and we shall have time to slip off and run away .
"" it cannot be this evening ," replied the old woman , " for i live a long way off ; but i promise you that to - morrow morning i and my sons will all come together and help you out of your trouble .
" so saying , the old woman departed , and porziella went to rest with a light heart and slept soundly all night .
but as soon as the birds began to cry , " long live the sun ," lo and behold , there was the old woman with her seven children ; and placing porziella in the midst of them they proceeded towards the city .
but they had not gone above half a mile when mase put his ear to the ground and cried : " hallo , have a care ; here ' s the fox .
the ogre is come home .
he has missed his wife and he is hastening after us with his cap under his arm .
" no sooner did nardo hear this than he washed his hands and made a sea of soap - suds ; and when the ogre came and saw all the suds he ran home and fetching a sack of bran he strewed it about and worked away treading it down with his feet until at last he got over this obstacle , though with great difficulty . but mase put his ear once more to the ground and exclaimed , " look sharp , comrade , here he comes !"
thereupon cola flung a piece of iron on the ground and instantly a field of razors sprang up .
when the ogre saw the path stopped he ran home again and clad himself in iron from head to foot and then returned and got over this peril . then mase , again putting his ear to the ground , cried , " up !
up !
to arms !
to arms !
for see here is the ogre coming at such a rate that he is actually flying ."
but micco was ready with his little stick , and in an instant he caused a terrible wood to rise up , so thick that it was quite impenetrable .
when the ogre came to this difficult pass he laid hold of a carrara knife which he wore at his side , and began to cut down the poplars and oaks and pine trees and chestnut trees , right and left ; so that with four or five strokes he had the whole forest on the ground and got clear of it .
presently , mase who kept his ears on the alert like a hare , again raised his voice and cried , " now we must be off , for the ogre is coming like the wind and here he is at our heels ."
as soon as petrullo heard this he took water from a little fountain , sprinkled it on the ground , and in an twinkling of an eye a large river rose up on the spot .
when the ogre saw this new obstacle , and that he could not make holes so fast as they found bungs to stop them , he stripped himself stark naked and swam across to the other side of the river with his clothes upon his head . mase , who put his ear to every chink , heard the ogre coming and exclaimed , " alas !
matters go ill with us now .
i already hear the clatter of the ogre ' s heels .
we must be on our guard and ready to meet the storm or else we are done for ."
" never fear ," said ascaddeo , " i will soon settle this ugly ragamuffin ."
so saying , he flung a pebble on the ground and instantly up rose a tower in which they all took refuge without delay , and barred the door .
but when the ogre came up and saw that they had got into so safe a place he ran home , got a vine - dresser ' s ladder , and carried it back on his shoulder to the tower . now mase , who kept his ears hanging down , heard at a distance the approach of the ogre and cried , " we are now at the butt end of the candle of hope .
ceccone is our last resource , for the ogre is coming back in a terrible fury .
alas !
how my heart beats , for i foresee an evil day ."
" you coward ," answered ceccone , " trust to me and i will hit him with a ball .
" as ceccone was speaking the ogre came , planted his ladder and began to climb up ; but ceccone , taking aim at him , shot out one of his eyes and laid him at full length on the ground , like a pear dropped from a tree .
then he went out of the tower and cut off the ogre ' s head with a big knife he carried about with him , just as if it had been new - made cheese .
thereupon they took the head with great joy to the king , who rejoiced at the recovery of his daughter , for he had repented a hundred times at having given her to an ogre .
and not many days after porziella was married to a handsome prince , and the seven sons and their mother who had delivered her from such a wretched life were rewarded with great riches .
