troubles are usually the brooms and shovels that smooth the road to a man ' s good fortune , of which he little dreams .
many a man curses the rain that falls upon his head , and knows not that it brings abundance to drive away hunger ; as is seen in the person of a young man of whom i will tell you . it is said that there was once a very rich merchant named antoniello , who had a son called cienzo .
it happened that cienzo was one day throwing stones on the sea - shore with the son of the king of naples , and by chance broke his companion ' s head .
when he told his father , antoniello flew into a rage with fear of the consequences and abused his son ; but cienzo answered , " sir , i have always heard say that better is the law court than the doctor in one ' s house .
would it not have been worse if he had broken my head ?
it was he who began and provoked me .
we are but boys , and there are two sides to the quarrel .
after all tis a first fault , and the king is a man of reason ; but let the worst come to the worst , what great harm can he do me ?
the wide world is one ' s home ; and let him who is afraid turn constable .
" but antoniello would not listen to reason .
he made sure the king would kill cienzo for his fault and said , " don ' t stand here at risk of your life ; but march off this very instant , so that nobody may hear a word , new or old , of what you have done .
a bird in the bush is better than a bird in the cage .
here is money .
take one of the two enchanted horses i have in the stable , and the dog which is also enchanted , and tarry no longer here .
it is better to scamper off and use your own heels than to be touched by another ' s ; better to throw your legs over your back than to carry your head between two legs .
if you don ' t take your knapsack and be off , none of the saints can help you !
" then begging his father ' s blessing , cienzo mounted his horse , and tucking the enchanted dog under his arm , he went his way out of the city .
making a winter of tears with a summer of sighs he went his way until the evening , when he came to a wood that kept the mule of the sun outside its limits , while it was amusing itself with silence and the shades .
an old house stood there , at the foot of a tower .
cienzo knocked at the door of the tower ; but the master , being in fear of robbers , would not open to him , so the poor youth was obliged to remain in the ruined old house .
he turned his horse out to graze in a meadow , and threw himself on some straw he found , with the dog by his side .
but scarcely had he closed his eyes when he was awakened by the barking of the dog , and heard footsteps stirring in the house .
cienzo , who was bold and venturesome , seized his sword and began to lay about him in the dark ; but perceiving that he was only striking the wind and hit no one , he turned round again to sleep .
after a few minutes he felt himself pulled gently by the foot .
he turned to lay hold again of his cutlass , and jumping up , exclaimed , " hollo there !
you are getting too troublesome ; but leave off this sport and let ' s have a bout of it if you have any pluck , for you have found the last to your shoe !
" at these words he heard a shout of laughter and then a hollow voice saying , " come down here and i will tell you who i am ."
then cienzo , without losing courage , answered , " wait awhile , i ' ll come ."
so he groped about until at last he found a ladder which led to a cellar ; and , going down , he saw a lighted lamp , and three ghost - looking figures who were making a piteous clamour , crying , " alas , my beauteous treasure , i must lose thee !
" when cienzo saw this he began himself to cry and lament , for company ' s sake ; and after he had wept for some time , the moon having now , with the axe of her rays broken the bar of the sky , the three figures who were making the outcry said to cienzo , " take this treasure , which is destined for thee alone , but mind and take care of it ."
then they vanished .
and cienzo , espying the sunlight through a hole in the wall , wished to climb up again , but could not find the ladder , whereat he set up such a cry that the master of the tower heard him and fetched a ladder , when they discovered a great treasure .
he wished to give part of it to cienzo , but the latter refused ; and taking his dog and mounting once more on his horse set out again on his travels . after a while he arrived at a wild and dreary forest , so dark that it made you shudder .
there , upon the bank of a river , he found a fairy surrounded by a band of robbers .
cienzo , seeing the wicked intention of the robbers , seized his sword and soon made a slaughter of them .
the fairy showered thanks upon him for this brave deed done for her sake , and invited him to her palace that she might reward him .
but cienzo replied , " it is nothing at all ; thank you kindly .
another time i will accept the favour ; but now i am in haste , on business of importance !
" so saying he took his leave ; and travelling on a long way he came at last to the palace of a king , which was all hung with mourning , so that it made one ' s heart black to look at it .
when cienzo inquired the cause of the mourning the folks answered , " a dragon with seven heads has made his appearance in this country , the most terrible monster that ever was seen , with the crest of a cock , the head of a cat , eyes of fire , the mouth of a bulldog , the wings of a bat , the claws of a bear , and the tail of a serpent .
now this dragon swallows a maiden every day , and now the lot has fallen on menechella , the daughter of the king .
so there is great weeping and wailing in the royal palace , since the fairest creature in all the land is doomed to be devoured by this horrid beast .
" when cienzo heard this he stepped aside and saw menechella pass by with the mourning train , accompanied by the ladies of the court and all the women of the land , wringing their hands and tearing out their hair by handfuls , and bewailing the sad fate of the poor girl .
then the dragon came out of the cave .
but cienzo laid hold of his sword and struck off a head in a trice ; but the dragon went and rubbed his neck on a certain plant which grew not far off , and suddenly the head joined itself on again , like a lizard joining itself to its tail .
cienzo , seeing this , exclaimed , " he who dares not , wins not "; and , setting his teeth , he struck such a furious blow that he cut off all seven heads , which flew from the necks like peas from the pan .
whereupon he took out the tongues , and putting them in his pocket , he flung the heads a mile apart from the body , so that they might never come together again .
then he sent menechella home to her father , and went himself to repose in a tavern . when the king saw his daughter his delight is not to be told ; and having heard the manner in which she had been freed , he ordered a proclamation to be instantly made , that whosoever had killed the dragon should come and marry the princess .
now a rascal of a country fellow , hearing this proclamation , took the heads of the dragon , and said , " menechella has been saved by me ; these hands have freed the land from destruction ; behold the dragon ' s heads , which are the proofs of my valour ; therefore recollect , every promise is a debt ."
as soon as the king heard this , he lifted the crown from his own head and set it upon the countryman ' s poll , who looked like a thief on the gallows . the news of this proclamation flew through the whole country , till at last it came to the ears of cienzo , who said to himself , " verily , i am a great blockhead !
i had hold of fortune by the forelock , and i let her escape out of my hand .
here ' s a man offers to give me the half of a treasure he finds , and i care no more for it than a german for cold water ; the fairy wishes to entertain me in her palace , and i care as little for it as an ass for music ; and now that i am called to the crown , here i stand and let a rascally thief cheat me out of my trump - card !"
so saying he took an inkstand , seized a pen , and spreading out a sheet of paper , began to write :" to the most beautiful jewel of women , menechella -- having , by the favour of sol in leo , saved thy life , i hear that another plumes himself with my labours , that another claims the reward of the service which i rendered .
thou , therefore , who wast present at the dragon ' s death , canst assure the king of the truth , and prevent his allowing another to gain this reward while i have had all the toil .
for it will be the right effect of thy fair royal grace and the merited recompense of this strong hero ' s fist .
in conclusion , i kiss thy delicate little hands .
" from the inn of the flower - pot , sunday .
" having written this letter , and sealed it with a wafer , he placed it in the mouth of the enchanted dog , saying , " run off as fast as you can and take this to the king ' s daughter .
give it to no one else , but place it in the hand of that silver - faced maiden herself .
" away ran the dog to the palace as if he were flying , and going up the stairs he found the king , who was still paying compliments to the country clown .
when the man saw the dog with the letter in his mouth , he ordered it to be taken from him ; but the dog would not give it to any one , and bounding up to menechella he placed it in her hand .
then menechella rose from her seat , and , making a curtsey to the king , she gave him the letter to read ; and when the king had read it he ordered that the dog should be followed to see where he went , and that his master should be brought before him .
so two of the courtiers immediately followed the dog , until they came to the tavern , where they found cienzo ; and , delivering the message from the king , they conducted him to the palace , into the presence of the king .
then the king demanded how it was that he boasted of having killed the dragon , since the heads were brought by the man who was sitting crowned at his side .
and cienzo answered , " that fellow deserves a pasteboard mitre rather than a crown , since he has had the impudence to tell you a bouncing lie .
but to prove to you that i have done the deed and not this rascal , order the heads to be produced .
none of them can speak to the proof without a tongue , and these i have brought with me as witnesses to convince you of the truth .
" so saying he pulled the tongues out of his pocket , while the countryman was struck all of a heap , not knowing what would be the end of it ; and the more so when menechella added , " this is the man !
ah , you dog of a countryman , a pretty trick you have played me !"
when the king heard this , he took the crown from the head of that false loon and placed it on that of cienzo ; and he was on the point of sending the imposter to the galleys , but cienzo begged the king to have mercy on him and to confound his wickedness with courtesy .
then he married menechella , and the tables were spread and a royal banquet was set forth ; and in the morning they sent for antoniello with all his family ; and antoniello soon got into great favour with the king , and saw in the person of his son the saying verified --" a straight port to a crooked ship ."
