all the ill - deeds that a man commits have some colour of excuse -- either contempt which provokes , need which compels , love which blinds , or anger which breaks the neck .
but ingratitude is a thing that has no excuse , true or false , upon which it can fix ; and it is therefore the worst of vices , since it dries up the fountain of compassion , extinguishes the fire of love , closes the road to benefits , and causes vexation and repentance to spring up in the hearts of the ungrateful .
as you will see in the story which i am about to relate . a peasant had twelve daughters , not one of whom was a head taller than the next ; for every year their mother presented him with a little girl ; so that the poor man , to support his family decently , went early every morning as a day labourer and dug hard the whole day long .
with what his labour produced he just kept his little ones from dying of hunger . he happened , one day , to be digging at the foot of a mountain , the spy of other mountains , that thrust its head above the clouds to see what they were doing up in the sky , and close to a cavern so deep and dark that the sun was afraid to enter it .
out of this cavern there came a green lizard as big as a crocodile ; and the poor man was so terrified that he had not the power to run away , expecting every moment the end of his days from a gulp of that ugly animal .
but the lizard , approaching him , said , " be not afraid , my good man , for i am not come here to do you any harm , but to do you good .
" when masaniello ( for that was the name of the labourer ) heard this , he fell on his knees and said , " mistress what ' s - your - name , i am wholly in your power .
act then worthily and have compassion on this poor trunk that has twelve branches to support .
"" it is on this very account ," said the lizard , " that i am disposed to serve you ; so bring me , to - morrow morning the youngest of your daughters ; for i will rear her up like my own child , and love her as my life .
" at this the poor father was more confounded than a thief when the stolen goods are found on his back .
for , hearing the lizard ask him for one of his daughters , and that too , the tenderest of them , he concluded that the cloak was not without wool on it , and that she wanted the child as a titbit to stay her appetite .
then he said to himself , " if i give her my daughter , i give her my soul .
if i refuse her , she will take this body of mine .
if i yield her , i am robbed of my heart ; if i deny her she will suck out my blood .
if i consent , she takes away part of myself ; if i refuse , she takes the whole .
what shall i resolve on ?
what course shall i take ?
what expedient shall i adopt " oh , what an ill day ' s work have i made of it !
what a misfortune has rained down from heaven upon me !
" while he was speaking thus , the lizard said , " resolve quickly and do what i tell you ; or you will leave only your rags here .
for so i will have it , and so it will be ."
masaniello , hearing this decree and having no one to whom he could appeal , returned home quite melancholy , as yellow in the face as if he had jaundice ; and his wife , seeing him hanging his head like a sick bird and his shoulders like one that is wounded , said to him , " what has happened to you , husband ?
have you had a quarrel with any one ?
is there a warrant out against you ?
or is the ass dead ?
"" nothing of that sort ," said masaniello , " but a horned lizard has put me into a fright , for she has threatened that if i do not bring her our youngest daughter , she will make me suffer for it .
my head is turning like a reel .
i know not what fish to take .
on one side love constrains me ; on the other the burden of my family .
i love renzolla dearly , i love my own life dearly .
if i do not give the lizard this portion of my heart , she will take the whole compass of my unfortunate body .
so now , dear wife , advise me , or i am ruined !
" when his wife heard this , she said , " who knows , husband , but this may be a lizard with two tails , that will make our fortune ?
who knows but this lizard may put an end to all our miseries ?
how often , when we should have an eagle ' s sight to discern the good luck that is running to meet us , we have a cloth before our eyes and the cramp in our hands , when we should lay hold on it .
so go , take her away , for my heart tells me that some good fortune awaits the poor little thing !
" these words comforted masaniello ; and the next morning , as soon as the sun with the brush of his rays whitewashed the sky , which the shades of night had blackened , he took the little girl by the hand , and led her to the cave .
then the lizard came out , and taking the child gave the father a bag full of crowns , saying , " go now , be happy , for renzolla has found both father and mother .
" masaniello , overjoyed , thanked the lizard and went home to his wife .
there was money enough for portions to all the other daughters when they married , and even then the old folks had sauce remaining for themselves to enable them to swallow with relish the toils of life . then the lizard made a most beautiful palace for renzolla , and brought her up in such state and magnificence as would have dazzled the eyes of any queen .
she wanted for nothing .
her food was fit for a count , her clothing for a princess .
she had a hundred maidens to wait upon her , and with such good treatment she grew as sturdy as an oak - tree . it happened , as the king was out hunting in those parts , that night overtook him , and as he stood looking round , not knowing where to lay his head , he saw a candle shining in the palace .
so he sent one of his servants , to ask the owner to give him shelter .
when the servant came to the palace , the lizard appeared before him in the shape of a beautiful lady ; who , after hearing his message , said that his master should be a thousand times welcome , and that neither bread nor knife should there be wanting .
the king , on hearing this reply , went to the palace and was received like a cavalier .
a hundred pages went out to meet him , so that it looked like the funeral of a rich man .
a hundred other pages brought the dishes to the table .
a hundred others made a brave noise with musical instruments .
but , above all , renzolla served the king and handed him drink with such grace that he drank more love than wine . when he had thus been so royally entertained , he felt he could not live without renzolla ; so , calling the fairy , he asked her for his wife .
whereupon the fairy , who wished for nothing but renzolla ' s good , not only freely consented , but gave her a dowry of seven millions of gold . the king , overjoyed at this piece of good fortune , departed with renzolla , who , ill - mannered and ungrateful for all the fairy had done for her , went off with her husband without uttering one single word of thanks .
then the fairy , beholding such ingratitude , cursed her , and wished that her face should become like that of a she - goat ; and hardly had she uttered the words , when renzolla ' s mouth stretched out , with a beard a span long on it , her jaws shrunk , her skin hardened , her cheeks grew hairy , and her plaited tresses turned to pointed horns . when the poor king saw this he was thunderstruck , not knowing what had happened that so great a beauty should be thus transformed ; and , with sighs and tears he exclaimed , " where are the locks that bound me ?
where are the eyes that transfixed me ?
must i then be the husband of a she - goat ?
no , no , my heart shall not break for such a goat - face !"
so saying , as soon as they reached his palace , he put renzolla into a kitchen , along with a chambermaid ; and gave to each of them ten bundles of flax to spin , commanding them to have the thread ready at the end of a week . the maid , in obedience to the king , set about carding the flax , preparing and putting it on the distaff , twirling her spindle , reeling it and working away without ceasing ; so that on saturday evening her thread was all done .
but renzolla , thinking she was still the same as in the fairy ' s house , not having looked at herself in the glass , threw the flax out of the window , saying , " a pretty thing indeed of the king to set me such work to do !
if he wants shirts let him buy them , and not fancy that he picked me up out of the gutter .
but let him remember that i brought him home seven millions of gold , and that i am his wife and not his servant .
methinks , too , that he is somewhat of a donkey to treat me this way !
" nevertheless , when saturday morning came , seeing that the maid had spun all her share of the flax , renzolla was greatly afraid ; so away she went to the palace of the fairy and told her misfortune .
then the fairy embraced her with great affection , and gave her a bag full of spun thread , to present to the king and show him what a notable and industrious housewife she was .
renzolla took the bag , and without saying one word of thanks , went to the royal palace ; so again the fairy was quite angered at the conduct of the graceless girl . when the king had taken the thread , he gave two little dogs , one to renzolla and one to the maid , telling them to feed and rear them .
the maid reared hers on bread crumbs and treated it like a child ; but renzolla grumbled , saying , " a pretty thing truly !
as my grandfather used to say , are we living under the turks ?
am i indeed to comb and wait upon dogs ?"
and she flung the dog out of the window ! some months afterwards , the king asked for the dogs ; whereat renzolla , losing heart , ran off again to the fairy , and at the gate stood the old man who was the porter .
" who are you ," said he , " and whom do you want ?"
renzolla , hearing herself addressed in this off - hand way , replied , " don ' t you know me , you old goat - beard ?
"" why do you miscall me ?"
said the porter .
" this is the thief accusing the constable .
i a goat - beard indeed !
you are a goat - beard and a half , and you merit it and worse for your presumption .
wait awhile , you impudent woman ; i ' ll enlighten you and you will see to what your airs and impertinence have brought you !
" so saying , he ran into his room , and taking a looking - glass , set it before renzolla ; who , when she saw her ugly , hairy visage , was like to have died with terror .
her dismay at seeing her face so altered that she did not know herself cannot be told .
whereupon the old man said to her , " you ought to recollect , renzolla , that you are a daughter of a peasant and that it was the fairy that raised you to be a queen .
but you , rude , unmannerly , and thankless as you are , having little gratitude for such high favours , have kept her waiting outside your heart , without showing the slightest mark of affection .
you have brought the quarrel on yourself ; see what a face you have got by it !
see to what you are brought by your ingratitude ; for through the fairy ' s spell you have not only changed face , but condition .
but if you will do as this white - beard advises , go and look for the fairy ; throw yourself at her feet , tear your beard , beat your breast , and ask pardon for the ill - treatment you have shown her .
she is tender - hearted and she will be moved to pity by your misfortune .
" renzolla , who was touched to the quick , and felt that he had hit the nail on the head , followed the old man ' s advice .
then the fairy embraced and kissed her ; and restoring her to her former appearance , she clad her in a robe that was quite heavy with gold ; and placing her in a magnificent coach , accompanied with a crowd of servants , she brought her to the king .
when the king beheld her , so beautiful and splendidly attired , he loved her as his own life ; blaming himself for all the misery he had made her endure , but excusing himself on account of that odious goat - face which had been the cause of it .
thus renzolla lived happy , loving her husband , honouring the fairy , and showing herself grateful to the old man , having learned to her cost that --" it is always good to be mannerly ."
