great is the power of friendship , which makes us willingly bear toils and perils to serve a friend .
we value our wealth as a trifle and life as a straw , when we can give them for a friend ' s sake .
fables teach us this and history is full of instances of it ; and i will give you an example which my grandmother used to relate to me .
so open your ears and shut your mouths and hear what i shall tell you . there was once a certain king of long - trellis named giannone , who , desiring greatly to have children , continually made prayers to the gods that they would grant his wish ; and , in order to incline them the more to his petition , he was so charitable to beggars and pilgrims that he shared with them all he possessed .
but seeing , at last , that these things availed him nothing ; and that there was no end to putting his hand into his pocket , he bolted fast his door , and shot with a cross - bow at all who came near . now it happened one day , that a long - bearded pilgrim was passing that way , and not knowing that the king had turned over a new leaf , or perhaps knowing it and wishing to make him change his mind again , he went to giannone and begged for shelter in his house .
but , with a fierce look and terrible growl , the king said to him , " if you have no other candle than this , you may go to bed in the dark .
the kittens have their eyes open , and i am no longer a child ."
and when the old man asked what was the cause of this change , the king replied , " to further my desire for children , i have spent and lent to all who came and all who went , and have squandered all my treasure .
at last , seeing the beard was gone , i stopped shaving and laid aside the razor .
"" if that be all ," replied the pilgrim , " you may set your mind at rest , for i promise that your wish shall forthwith be fulfilled , on pain of losing my ears .
"" be it so ," said the king , " i pledge my word that i will give you one half of my kingdom ."
and the man answered , " listen now to me -- if you wish to hit the mark , you have only to get the heart of a sea - dragon , and have it cooked and eaten by the queen , and you will see that what i say will speedily come to pass .
"" that hardly seems possible ," said the king , " but at the worst i lose nothing bythe trial ; so i must , this very moment , get the dragon ' s heart .
" so he sent a hundred fishermen out ; and they got ready all kinds of fishing - tackle , drag - nets , casting - nets , seine - nets , bow - nets , and fishing - lines ; and they tacked and turned and cruised in all directions until at last they caught a dragon ; then they took out its heart and brought it to the king , who gave it to the queen to cook and eat .
and when she had eaten it , there was great rejoicing , for the king ' s desire was fulfilled and he became the father of two sons , so like the other that nobody but the queen could tell which was which .
and the boys grew up together in such love for one another that they could not be parted for a moment .
their attachment was so great that the queen began to be jealous , at seeing that the son whom she destined to be heir to his father , and whose name was fonzo , testified more affection for his brother canneloro than he did for herself .
and she knew not in what way to remove this thorn from her eyes . now one day fonzo wished to go a - hunting with his brother ; so he had a fire lighted in his chamber and began to melt lead to make bullets ; and being in want of i know not what , he went himself to look for it .
meanwhile the queen came in , and finding no one there but canneloro , she thought to put him out of the world .
so stooping down , she flung the hot bullet - mould at his face , which hit him over the brow and made an ugly wound .
she was just going to repeat the blow when fonzo came in ; so , pretending that she was only come in to see how he was , she gave him some caresses and went away . canneloro , pulling his hat down on his forehead , said nothing of his wound to fonzo , but stood quite quiet though he was burning with the pain .
but as soon as they had done making the balls , he told his brother that he must leave him .
fonzo , all in amazement at this new resolution , asked him the reason : but he replied , " enquire no more , my dear fonzo , let it suffice that i am obliged to go away and part with you , who are my heart and my soul and the breath of my body .
since it cannot be otherwise , farewell , and keep me in remembrance ."
then after embracing one another and shedding many tears , canneloro went to his own room .
he put on a suit of armour and a sword and armed himself from top to toe ; and , having taken a horse out of the stable , he was just putting his foot into the stirrup when fonzo came weeping and said , " since you are resolved to abandon me , you should , at least , leave me some token of your love , to diminish my anguish for your absence ."
thereupon canneloro struck his dagger into the ground , and instantly a fine fountain rose up .
then said he to his twin - brother , " this is the best memorial i can leave you .
by the flowing of this fountain you will follow the course of my life .
if you see it run clear , know that my life is likewise clear and tranquil .
if it is turbid , think that i am passing through troubles ; and if it is dry , depend on it that the oil of my life is all consumed and that i have paid the toll which belongs to nature !
" then he drove his sword into the ground , and immediately a myrtle - tree grew up , when he said , " as long as this myrtle is green , know that i too am green as a leek .
if you see it wither , think that my fortunes are not the best in this world ; but if it becomes quite dried up , you may mourn for your canneloro .
" so saying , after embracing one another again , canneloro set out on his travels ; journeying on and on , with many adventures which it would be too long to recount -- he at length arrived at the kingdom of clear - water , just at the time when they were holding a most splendid tournament , the hand of the king ' s daughter being promised to the victor .
here canneloro presented himself and bore him so bravely that he overthrew all the knights who were come from divers parts to gain a name for themselves .
whereupon he married the princess fenicia , and a great feast was made . when canneloro had been there some months in peace and quiet , an unhappy fancy came into his head for going to the chase .
he told it to the king , who said to him , " take care , my son - in - law ; do not be deluded .
be wise and keep open your eyes , for in these woods is a most wicked ogre who changes his form every day , one time appearing like a wolf , at another like a lion , now like a stag , now like an ass , like one thing and now like another .
by a thousand stratagems he decoys those who are so unfortunate as to meet him into a cave , where he devours them .
so , my son , do not put your safety into peril , or you will leave your rags there .
" canneloro , who did not know what fear was , paid no heed to the advice of his father - in - law .
as soon as the sun with the broom of his rays had cleared away the soot of the night he set out for the chase ; and , on his way , he came to a wood where , beneath the awning of the leaves , the shades has assembled to maintain their sway , and to make a conspiracy against the sun .
the ogre , seeing him coming , turned himself into a handsome doe ; which , as soon as canneloro perceived he began to give chase to her .
then the doe doubled and turned , and led him about hither and thither at such a rate , that at last she brought him into the very heart of the wood , where she raised such a tremendous snow - storm that it looked as if the sky was going to fall .
canneloro , finding himself in front of a cave , went into it to seek for shelter ; and being benumbed with the cold , he gathered some sticks which he found within it , and pulling his steel from his pocket , he kindled a large fire .
as he was standing by the fire to dry his clothes , the doe came to the mouth of the cave , and said , " sir knight , pray give me leave to warm myself a little while , for i am shivering with the cold .
" canneloro , who was of a kindly disposition , said to her , " draw near , and welcome .
"" i would gladly ," replied the doe , " but i am afraid you would kill me .
"" fear nothing ," answered canneloro , " trust to my word .
"" if you wish me to enter ," rejoined the doe , " tie up those dogs , that they may not hurt me , and tie up your horse that he may not kick me .
" so canneloro tied up his dogs and hobbled his horse , and the doe said , " i am now half assured , but unless you bind fast your sword , i dare not come in ."
then canneloro , who wished to become friends with the doe , bound his sword as a countryman does , when he carries it in the city for fear of the constables .
as soon as the ogre saw canneloro defenceless , he re - took his own form , and laying hold on him , flung him into a pit at the bottom of the cave , and covered it up with a stone -- to keep him to eat . but fonzo , who , morning and evening visited the myrtle and the fountain , to learn news of the fate of canneloro , finding the one withered and the other troubled , instantly thought that his brother was undergoing misfortunes .
so , to help him , he mounted his horse without asking leave of his father or mother ; and arming himself well and taking two enchanted dogs , he went rambling through the world .
he roamed and rambled here , there , and everywhere until , at last , he came to clear - water , which he found all in mourning for the supposed death of canneloro .
and scarcely was he come to the court , when every one , thinking , from the likeness he bore him , that it was canneloro , hastened to tell fenicia the good news , who ran leaping down the stairs , and embracing fonzo cried , " my husband !
my heart !
where have you been all this time ?
" fonzo immediately perceived that canneloro had come to this country and had left it again ; so he resolved to examine the matter adroitly , to learn from the princess ' s discourse where his brother might be found .
and , hearing her say that he had put himself in great danger by that accursed hunting , especially if the cruel ogre should meet him , he at once concluded that canneloro must be there . the next morning , as soon as the sun had gone forth to give the gilded frills to the sky , he jumped out of bed , and neither the prayers of fenicia , nor the commands of the king could keep him back , but he would go to the chase .
so , mounting his horse , he went with the enchanted dogs to the wood , where the same thing befell him that had befallen canneloro ; and , entering the cave , he saw his brother ' s arms and dogs and horse fast bound , by which he became assured of the nature of the snare .
then the doe told him in like manner to tie his arms , dogs , and horse , but he instantly set them upon her and they tore her to pieces .
and as he was looking about for some traces of his brother , he heard his voice down in the pit ; so , lifting up the stone , he drew out canneloro , with all the others whom the ogre had buried alive to fatten .
then embracing each other with great joy , the twin - brothers went home , where fenicia , seeing them so much alike , did not know which to choose for her husband , until canneloro took off his cap and she saw the mark of the old wound and recognised him .
fonzo stayed there a month , taking his pleasure , and then wished to return to his own country , and canneloro wrote by him to his mother , bidding her lay aside her enmity and come and visit him and partake of his greatness , which she did .
but from that time forward , he never would hear of dogs or of hunting , recollecting the saying --" unhappy is he who corrects himself at his own cost ."
