this is one of the stories which that good soul , my uncle ' s grandmother ( whom heaven take to glory ), used to tell ; and , unless i have put on my spectacles upside down , i fancy it will give you pleasure . there was , once upon a time , a woman named pascadozzia , and one day , when she was standing at her window , which looked into the garden of an ogress , she saw such a fine bed of parsley that she almost fainted away with desire for some .
so when the ogress went out she could not restrain herself any longer , but plucked a handful of it .
the ogress came home and was going to cook her pottage when she found that some one had been stealing the parsley , and said , " ill luck to me , but i ' ll catch this long - fingered rogue and make him repent it ; i ' ll teach him to his cost that every one should eat off his own platter and not meddle with other folks ' cups .
" the poor woman went again and again down into the garden , until one morning the ogress met her , and in a furious rage exclaimed , " have i caught you at last , you thief , you rogue ; prithee , do you pay the rent of the garden that you come in this impudent way and steal my plants ?
by my faith , i ' ll make you do penance without sending you to rome .
" poor pascadozzia , in a terrible fright , began to make excuses , saying that neither from gluttony nor the craving of hunger had she been tempted by the devil to commit this fault , but from her fear lest her child should be born with a crop of parsley on its face .
" words are but wind ," answered the ogress , " i am not to be caught with such prattle ; you have closed the balance - sheet of life , unless you promise to give me the child , girl or boy , whichever it may be .
" the poor woman , in order to escape the peril in which she found herself , swore , with one hand upon the other , to keep the promise , and so the ogress let her go free .
but when the baby came it was a little girl , so beautiful that she was a joy to look upon , who was named parsley .
the little girl grew from day to day until , when she was seven years old , her mother sent her to school , and every time she went along the street and met the ogress the old woman said to her , " tell your mother to remember her promise ."
and she went on repeating this message so often that the poor mother , having no longer patience to listen to the refrain , said one day to parsley , " if you meet the old woman as usual , and she reminds you of the hateful promise , answer her , take it .
'" when parsley , who dreamt of no ill , met the ogress again , and heard her repeat the same words , she answered innocently as her mother had told her , whereupon the ogress , seizing her by her hair , carried her off to a wood which the horses of the sun never entered , not having paid the toll to the pastures of those shades .
then she put the poor girl into a tower which she caused to arise by her art , having neither gate nor ladder , but only a little window through which she ascended and descended by means of parsley ' s hair , which was very long , just as sailors climb up and down the mast of a ship . now it happened one day , when the ogress had left the tower , that parsley put her head out of the little window and let loose her tresses in the sun , and the son of a prince passing by saw those two golden banners which invited all souls to enlist under the standard of beauty , and , beholding with amazement , in the midst of those gleaming waves , a face that enchanted all hearts , he fell desperately in love with such wonderful beauty ; and , sending her a memorial of sighs , she decreed to receive him into favour .
she told him her troubles , and implored him to rescue her .
but a gossip of the ogress , who was for ever prying into things that did not concern her , and poking her nose into every corner , overheard the secret , and told the wicked woman to be on the look - out , for parsley had been seen talking with a certain youth , and she had her suspicions .
the ogress thanked the gossip for the information , and said that she would take good care to stop up the road .
as to parsley , it was , moreover , impossible for her to escape , as she had laid a spell upon her , so that unless she had in her hand the three gall - nuts which were in a rafter in the kitchen it would be labour lost to attempt to get away . whilst they were thus talking together , parsley , who stood with her ears wide open and had some suspicion of the gossip , overheard all that had passed .
and when night had spread out her black garments to keep them from the moth , and the prince had come as they had appointed , she let fall her hair ; he seized it with both hands , and cried , " draw up ."
when he was drawn up she made him first climb on to the rafters and find the gall - nuts , knowing well what effect they would have , as she had been enchanted by the ogress .
then , having made a rope - ladder , they both descended to the ground , took to their heels , and ran off towards the city .
but the gossip , happening to see them come out , set up a loud " halloo ," and began to shout and make such a noise that the ogress awoke , and , seeing that parsley had run away , she descended by the same ladder , which was still fastened to the window , and set off after the couple , who , when they saw her coming at their heels faster than a horse let loose , gave themselves up for lost .
but parsley , recollecting the gall - nuts , quickly threw one of the ground , and lo , instantly a corsican bulldog started up -- o , mother , such a terrible beast !-- which , with open jaws and barking loud , flew at the ogress as if to swallow her at a mouthful .
but the old woman , who was more cunning and spiteful than ever , put her hand into her pocket , and pulling out a piece of bread gave it to the dog , which made him hang his tail and allay his fury . then she turned to run after the fugitives again , but parsley , seeing her approach , threw the second gall - nut on the ground , and lo , a fierce lion arose , who , lashing the earth with his tail , and shaking his mane and opening wide his jaws a yard apart , was just preparing to make a slaughter of the ogress , when , turning quickly back , she stripped the skin off an ass which was grazing in the middle of a meadow and ran at the lion , who , fancying it a real jackass , was so frightened that he bounded away as fast as he could . the ogress having leaped over this second ditch turned again to pursue the poor lovers , who , hearing the clatter of her heels , and seeing clouds of dust that rose up to the sky , knew that she was coming again .
but the old woman , who was every moment in dread lest the lion should pursue her , had not taken off the ass ' s skin , and when parsley now threw down the third gall - nut there sprang up a wolf , who , without giving the ogress time to play any new trick , gobbled her up just as she was in the shape of a jackass .
so parsley and the prince , now freed from danger , went their way leisurely and quietly to the prince ' s kingdom , where , with his father ' s free consent , they were married .
thus , after all these storms of fate , they experienced the truth that --" one hour in port , the sailor , freed from fears , forgets the tempests of a hundred years ."
