truly the wise man said well that a command of gall cannot be obeyed like one of sugar .
a man must require just and reasonable things if he would see the scales of obedience properly trimmed .
from orders which are improper springs resistance which is not easily overcome , as happened to the king of rough - rock , who , by asking what he ought not of his daughter , caused her to run away from him , at the risk of losing both honour and life . there lived , it is said , once upon a time a king of rough - rock , who had a wife the very mother of beauty , but in the full career of her years she fell from the horse of health and broke her life .
before the candle of life went out at the auction of her years she called her husband and said to him , " i know you have always loved me tenderly ; show me , therefore , at the close of my days the completion of your love by promising me never to marry again , unless you find a woman as beautiful as i have been , otherwise i leave you my curse , and shall bear you hatred even in the other world .
" the king , who loved his wife beyond measure , hearing this her last wish , burst into tears , and for some time could not answer a single word .
at last , when he had done weeping , he said to her , " sooner than take another wife may the gout lay hold of me ; may i have my head cut off like a mackerel !
my dearest love , drive such a thought from your mind ; do not believe in dreams , or that i could love any other woman ; you were the first new coat of my love , and you shall carry away with you the last rags of my affection .
" as he said these words the poor young queen , who was at the point of death , turned up her eyes and stretched out her feet .
when the king saw her life thus running out he unstopped the channels of his eyes , and made such a howling and beating and outcry that all the court came running up , calling on the name of the dear soul , and upbraiding fortune for taking her from him , and plucking out his beard , he cursed the stars that had sent him such a misfortune .
but bearing in mind the maxim , " pain in one ' s elbow and pain for one ' s wife are alike hard to bear , but are soon over ," ere the night had gone forth into the place - of - arms in the sky to muster the bats he began to count upon his fingers and to reflect thus to himself , " here is my wife dead , and i am left a wretched widower , with no hope of seeing any one but this poor daughter whom she has left me .
i must therefore try to discover some means or other of having a son and heir .
but where shall i look ?
where shall i find a woman equal in beauty to my wife ?
every one appears a witch in comparison with her ; where , then , shall i find another with a bit of stick , or seek another with the bell , if nature made nardella ( may she be in glory ), and then broke the mould ?
alas , in what a labyrinth has she put me , in what a perplexity has the promise i made her left me !
but what do i say ?
i am running away before i have seen the wolf ; let me open my eyes and ears and look about ; may there not be some other as beautiful ?
is it possible that the world should be lost to me ?
is there such a dearth of women , or is the race extinct ?
" so saying he forthwith issued a proclamation and command that all the handsome women in the world should come to the touch - stone of beauty , for he would take the most beautiful to wife and endow her with a kingdom .
now , when this news was spread abroad , there was not a woman in the universe who did not come to try her luck -- not a witch , however ugly , who stayed behind ; for when it is a question of beauty , no scullion - wench will acknowledge herself surpassed ; every one piques herself on being the handsomest ; and if the looking - glass tells her the truth she blames the glass for being untrue , and the quicksilver for being put on badly . when the town was thus filled with women the king had them all drawn up in a line , and he walked up and down from top to bottom , and as he examined and measured each from head to foot one appeared to him wry - browed , another long - nosed , another broad - mouthed , another thick - lipped , another tall as a may - pole , another short and dumpy , another too stout , another too slender ; the spaniard did not please him on account of her dark colour , the neopolitan was not to his fancy on account of her gait , the german appeared cold and icy , the frenchwoman frivolous and giddy , the venetian with her light hair looked like a distaff of flax .
at the end of the end , one for this cause and another for that , he sent them all away , with one hand before and the other behind ; and , seeing that so many fair faces were all show and no wool , he turned his thoughts to his own daughter , saying , " why do i go seeking the impossible when my daughter preziosa is formed in the same mould of beauty as her mother ?
i have this fair face here in my house , and yet go looking for it at the fag - end of the world .
she shall marry whom i will , and so i shall have an heir .
" when preziosa heard this she retired to her chamber , and bewailing her ill - fortune as if she would not leave a hair upon her head ; and , whilst she was lamenting thus , an old woman came to her , who was her confidant .
as soon as she saw preziosa , who seemed to belong more to the other world than to this , and heard the cause of her grief , the old woman said to her , " cheer up , my daughter , do not despair ; there is a remedy for every evil save death .
now listen ; if your father speaks to you thus once again put this bit of wood into your mouth , and instantly you will be changed into a she - bear ; then off with you !
for in his fright he will let you depart , and go straight to the wood , where heaven has kept good - fortune in store for you since the day you were born , and whenever you wish to appear a woman , as you are and will remain , only take the piece of wood out of your mouth and you will return to your true form ."
then preziosa embraced the old woman , and , giving her a good apronful of meal , and ham and bacon , sent her away . as soon as the sun began to change his quarters , the king ordered the musicians to come , and , inviting all his lords and vassals , he held a great feast .
and after dancing for five or six hours , they all sat down to table , and ate and drank beyond measure .
then the king asked his courtiers to whom he should marry preziosa , as she was the picture of his dead wife .
but the instant preziosa heard this , she slipped the bit of wood into her mouth , and took the figure of a terrible she - bear , at the sight of which all present were frightened out of their wits , and ran off as fast as they could scamper . meanwhile preziosa went out , and took her way to a wood , where the shades were holding a consultation how they might do some mischief to the sun at the close of day .
and there she stayed , in the pleasant companionship of the other animals , until the son of the king of running - water came to hunt in that part of the country , who , at the sight of the bear , had like to have died on the spot .
but when he saw the beast come gently up to him , wagging her tail like a little dog and rubbing her sides against him , he took courage , and patted her , and said , " good bear , good bear !
there , there !
poor beast , poor beast !"
then he led her home and ordered that she should be taken great care of ; and he had her put into a garden close to the royal palace , that he might see her from the window whenever he wished . one day , when all the people of the house were gone out , and the prince was left alone , he went to the window to look out at the bear ; and there he beheld preziosa , who had taken the piece of wood out of her mouth , combing her golden tresses .
at the sight of this beauty , which was beyond the beyonds , he had like to have lost his senses with amazement , and tumbling down the stairs he ran out into the garden .
but preziosa , who was on the watch and observed him , popped the piece of wood into her mouth , and was instantly changed into a bear again . when the prince came down and looked about in vain for preziosa , whom he had seen from the window above , he was so amazed at the trick that a deep melancholy came over him , and in four days he fell sick , crying continually , " my bear , my bear !"
his mother , hearing him wailing thus , imagined that the bear had done him some hurt , and gave orders that she should be killed .
but the servants , enamoured of the tameness of the bear , who made herself beloved by the very stones in the road , took pity on her , and , instead of killing her , they led her to the wood , and told the queen that they had put an end to her . when this came to the ears of the prince , he acted in a way to pass belief .
ill or well he jumped out of bed , and was going at once to make mincemeat of the servants .
but when they told him the truth of the affair , he jumped on horseback , half - dead as he was , and went rambling about and seeking everywhere , until at length he found the bear .
then he took her home again , and putting her into a chamber , said to her , " o lovely morsel for a king , who art shut up in this skin !
o candle of love , who art enclosed within this hairy lanthorn !
wherefore all this trifling ?
do you wish to see me pine and pant , and die by inches ?
i am wasting away ; without hope , and tormented by thy beauty .
and you see clearly the proof , for i am shrunk two - thirds in size , like wine boiled down , and am nothing but skin and bone , for the fever is double - stitched to my veins .
so lift up the curtain of this hairy hide , and let me gaze upon the spectacle of thy beauty !
raise , o raise the leaves off this basket , and let me get a sight of the fine fruit beneath !
lift up that curtain , and let my eyes pass in to behold the pomp of wonders !
who has shut up so smooth a creature in a prison woven of hair ?
who has locked up so rich a treasure in a leathern chest ?
let me behold this display of graces , and take in payment all my love ; for nothing else can cure the troubles i endure .
" but when he had said , again and again , this and a great deal more , and still saw that all his words were thrown away , he took to his bed , and had such a desperate fit that the doctors prognosticated badly of his case .
then his mother , who had no other joy in the world , sat down by his bedside , and said to him , " my son , whence comes all this grief ?
what melancholy humour has seized you ?
you are young , you are loved , you are great , you are rich -- what then is it you want , my son ?
speak ; a bashful beggar carries an empty bag .
if you want a wife , only choose , and i will bring the match about ; do you take , and i ' ll pay .
do you not see that your illness is an illness to me ?
your pulse beats with fever in your veins , and my heart beats with illness in my brain , for i have no other support of my old age than you .
so be cheerful now , and cheer up my heart , and do not see the whole kingdom thrown into mourning , this house into lamentation , and your mother forlorn and heart - broken .
" when the prince heard these words , he said , " nothing can console me but the sight of the bear .
therefore , if you wish to see me well again , let her be brought into this chamber ; i will have no one else to attend me , and make my bed , and cook for me , but she herself ; and you may be sure that this pleasure will make me well in a trice .
" thereupon his mother , although she thought it ridiculous enough for the bear to act as cook and chambermaid , and feared that her son was not in his right mind , yet , in order to gratify him , had the bear fetched .
and when the bear came up to the prince ' s bed , she raised her paw and felt the patient ' s pulse , which made the queen laugh outright , for she thought every moment that the bear would scratch his nose .
then the prince said , " my dear bear , will you not cook for me , and give me my food , and wait upon me ?"
and the bear nodded her head , to show that she accepted the office .
then his mother had some fowls brought , and a fire lighted on the hearth in the same chamber , and some water set to boil ; whereupon the bear , laying hold on a fowl , scalded and plucked it handily , and drew it , and then stuck one portion of it on the spit , and with the other part she made such a delicious hash that the prince , who could not relish even sugar , licked his fingers at the taste .
and when he had done eating , the bear handed him drink with such grace that the queen was ready to kiss her on the forehead .
thereupon the prince arose , and the bear quickly set about making the bed ; and running into the garden , she gathered a clothful of roses and citron - flowers and strewed them over it , so that the queen said the bear was worth her weight in gold , and that her son had good reason to be fond of her . but when the prince saw these pretty offices they only added fuel to the fire ; and if before he wasted by ounces , he now melted away by pounds , and he said to the queen , " my lady mother , if i do not give this bear a kiss , the breath will leave my body ."
whereupon the queen , seeing him fainting away , said , " kiss him , kiss him , my beautiful beast !
let me not see my poor son die of longing !"
then the bear went up to the prince , and taking him by the cheeks , kissed him again and again .
meanwhile ( i know not how it was ) the piece of wood slipped out of preziosa ' s mouth , and she remained in the arms of the prince , the most beautiful creature in the world ; and pressing her to his heart , he said , " i have caught you , my little rogue !
you shall not escape from me again without a good reason ."
at these words preziosa , adding the colour of modesty to the picture of her natural beauty , said to him , " i am indeed in your hands -- only guard me safely , and marry me when you will .
" then the queen inquired who the beautiful maiden was , and what had brought her to this savage life ; and preziosa related the whole story of her misfortunes , at which the queen , praising her as a good and virtuous girl , told her son that she was content that preziosa should be his wife .
then the prince , who desired nothing else in life , forthwith pledged her his faith ; and the mother giving them her blessing , this happy marriage was celebrated with great feasting and illuminations , and preziosa experienced the truth of the saying that --" one who acts well may always expect good ."
