i once heard say that juno went to candia to find falsehood .
but if any one were to ask me where fraud and hypocrisy might truly be found , i should know of no other place to name than the court , where detraction always wears the mask of amusement ; where , at the same time , people cut and sew up , wound and heal , break and glue together -- of which i will give you one instance in the story that i am going to tell you . there was once upon a time in the service of the king of wide - river an excellent youth named corvetto , who , for his good conduct , was beloved by his master ; and for this very cause was disliked and hated by all the courtiers .
these courtiers were filled with spite and malice , and bursting with envy at the kindness which the king showed to corvetto ; so that all day long , in every corner of the palace , they did nothing but tattle and whisper , murmur and grumble at the poor lad , saying , " what sorcery has this fellow practised on the king that he takes such a fancy to him ?
how comes he by this luck that not a day passes that he receives some new favours , whilst we are for ever going backward like a rope - maker , and getting from bad to worse , though we slave like dogs , toil like field - labourers , and run about like deer to hit the king ' s pleasure to a hair ?
truly one must be born to good fortune in this world , and he who has not luck might as well be thrown into the sea .
what is to be done ?
we can only look on and envy ."
these and other words fell from their mouths like poisoned arrows aimed at the ruin of corvetto as at a target .
alas for him who is condemned to that den the court , where flattery is sold by the kilderkin , malignity and ill - offices are measured out in bushels , deceit and treachery are weighed by the ton !
but who can count all the attempts these courtiers made to bring him to grief , or the false tales that they told to the king to destroy his reputation !
but corvetto , who was enchanted , and perceived the traps , and discovered the tricks , was aware of all the intrigues and the ambuscades , the plots and conspiracies of his enemies .
he kept his ears always on the alert and his eyes open in order not to take a false step , well knowing that the fortune of courtiers is as glass .
but the higher the lad continued to rise the lower the others fell ; till at last , being puzzled to know how to take him off his feet , as their slander was not believed , they thought of leading him to disaster by the path of flattery , which they attempted in the following manner . ten miles distant from scotland , where the seat of this king was , there dwelt an ogre , the most inhuman and savage that had ever been in ogreland , who , being persecuted by the king , had fortified himself in a lonesome wood on the top of a mountain , where no bird ever flew , and was so thick and tangled that one could never see the sun there .
this ogre had a most beautiful horse , which looked as if it were formed with a pencil ; and amongst other wonderful things , it could speak like any man .
now the courtiers , who knew how wicked the ogre was , how thick the wood , how high the mountain , and how difficult it was to get at the horse , went to the king , and telling him minutely the perfections of the animal , which was a thing worthy of a king , added that he ought to endeavour by all means to get it out of the ogre ' s claws , and that corvetto was just the lad to do this , as he was expert and clever at escaping out of the fire .
the king , who knew not that under the flowers of these words a serpent was concealed , instantly called corvetto , and said to him , " if you love me , see that in some way or another you obtain for me the horse of my enemy the ogre , and you shall have no cause toregret having done me this service .
" corvetto knew well that this drum was sounded by those who wished him ill ; nevertheless , to obey the king , he set out and took the road to the mountain .
then going very quietly to the ogre ' s stable , he saddled and mounted the horse , and fixing his feet firmly in the stirrup , took his way back .
but as soon as the horse saw himself spurred out of the palace , he cried aloud , " hollo !
be on your guard !
corvetto is riding off with me ."
at this alarm the ogre instantly set out , with all the animals that served him , to cut corvetto in pieces .
from this side jumped an ape , from that was seen a large bear ; here sprang forth a lion , there came running a wolf .
but the youth , by the aid of bridle and spur , distanced the mountain , and galloping without stop to the city , arrived at the court , where he presented the horse to the king . then the king embraced him more than a son , and pulling out his purse , filled his hands with crown - pieces .
at this the rage of the courtiers knew no bounds ; and whereas at first they were puffed up with a little pipe , they were now bursting with the blasts of a smith ' s bellows , seeing that the crowbars with which they thought to lay corvetto ' s good fortune in ruins only served to smooth the road to his prosperity .
knowing , however , that walls are not levelled by the first attack of the battering - ram , they resolved to try their luck a second time , and said to the king , " we wish you joy of the beautiful horse !
it will indeed be an ornament to the royal stable .
but what a pity you have not the ogre ' s tapestry , which is a thing more beautiful than words can tell , and would spread your fame far and wide !
there is no one , however , able to procure this treasure but corvetto , who is just the lad to do such a kind of service .
" then the king , who danced to every tune , and ate only the peel of this bitter but sugared fruit , called corvetto , and begged him to procure for him the ogre ' s tapestry .
off went corvetto and in four seconds was on the top of the mountain where the ogre lived ; then passing unseen into the chamber in which he slept , he hid himself under the bed , and waited as still as a mouse , until night , to make the stars laugh , puts a carnival - mask on the face of the sky .
and as soon as the ogre and his wife were gone to bed , corvetto stripped the walls of the chamber very quietly , and wishing to steal the counterpane of the bed likewise , he began to pull it gently .
thereupon the ogre , suddenly starting up , told his wife not to pull so , for she was dragging all the clothes off him , and would give him his death of cold .
" why you are uncovering me !"
answered the ogress .
" where is the counterpane ?"
replied the ogre ; and stretching out his hand to the floor he touched corvetto ' s face ; whereupon he set up a loud cry ,--" the imp !
the imp !
hollo , here , lights !
run quickly !"
-- till the whole house was turned topsy - turvy with the noise .
but corvetto , after throwing the clothes out of the window , let himself drop down upon them .
then making up a good bundle , he set out on the road to the city , where the reception he met with from the king , and the vexation of the courtiers , who were bursting with spite , are not to be told .
nevertheless they laid a plan to fall upon corvetto with the rear - guard of their roguery , and went again to the king , who was almost beside himself with delight at the tapestry -- which was not only of silk embroidered with gold , but had besides more than a thousand devices and thoughts worked on it .
and amongst the rest , if i remember right , there was a cock in the act of crowing at daybreak , and out of its mouth was seen coming a motto in tuscan : if i only see you .
and in another part a drooping heliotrope with a tuscan motto : at sunset -- with so many other pretty things that it would require a better memory and more time than i have to relate them . when the courtiers came to the king , who was thus transported with joy , they said to him , " as corvetto has done so much to serve you , it would be no great matter for him , in order to give you a signal pleasure , to get the ogre ' s palace , which is fit for an emperor to live in ; for it has so many rooms and chambers , inside and out , that it can hold an army .
and you would never believe all the courtyards , porticoes , colonnades , balconies , and spiral chimneys which there are -- built with such marvellous architecture that art prides herself upon them , nature is abashed , and stupor is in delight .
" the king , who had a fruitful brain which conceived quickly , called corvetto again , and telling him the great longing that had seized him for the ogre ' s palace , begged him to add this service to all the others he had done him , promising to score it up with the chalk of gratitude at the tavern of memory .
so corvetto instantly set out heels over head ; and arriving at the ogre ' s palace , he found that the ogress , whilst her husband was gone to invite the kinsfolk , was busying herself with preparing the feast .
then corvetto entering , with a look of compassion , said , " good - day , my good woman !
truly , you are a brave housewife !
but why do you torment the very life out of you in this way ?
only yesterday you were ill in bed , and now you are slaving thus , and have no pity on your own flesh .
"" what would you have me do ?"
replied the ogress .
" i have no one to help me .
"" i am here ," answered corvetto , " ready to help you tooth and nail .
"" welcome , then !"
said the ogress ; " and as you proffer me so much kindness , just help me to split four logs of wood .
"" with all my heart ," answered corvetto , " but if four logs are not enow , let me split five ."
and taking up a newly - ground axe , instead of striking the wood , he struck the ogress on the neck , and made her fall to the ground like a pear .
then running quickly to the gate , he dug a deep hole before the entrance , and covering it over with bushes and earth , he hid himself behind the gate . as soon as corvetto saw the ogre coming with his kinsfolk , he set up a loud cry in the courtyard , " stop , stop !
i ' ve caught him !"
and " long live the king of wide - river ."
when the ogre heard this challenge , he ran like mad at corvetto , to make a hash of him .
but rushing furiously towards the gate , down he tumbled with all his companions , head over heels to the bottom of the pit , where corvetto speedily stoned them to death .
then he shut the door , and took the keys to the king , who , seeing the valour and cleverness of the lad , in spite of ill - fortune and the envy and annoyance of the courtiers , gave him his daughter to wife ; so that the crosses of envy had proved rollers to launch corvetto ' s bark of life on the sea of greatness ; whilst his enemies remained confounded and bursting with rage , and went to bed without a candle ; for --" the punishment of ill deeds past , though long delay ' d , yet comes at last ."
