an ignorant man who associates with clever people has always been more praised than a wise man who keeps the company of fools ; for as much profit and fame as one may gain from the former , so much wealth and honour one may lose by the fault of the latter ; and as the proof of the pudding is in the eating , you will know from the story which i am going to tell you whether my proposition be true . there was once a man who was as rich as the sea , but as there can never be any perfect happiness in this world , he had a son so idle and good - for - nothing that he could not tell a bean from a cucumber .
so being unable any longer to put up with his folly , he gave him a good handful of crowns , and sent him to trade in the levant ; for he well knew that seeing various countries and mixing with divers people awaken the genius and sharpen the judgment , and make men expert . moscione ( for that was the name of the son ) got on horseback , and began his journey towards venice , the arsenal of the wonders of the world , to embark on board some vessel bound for cairo ; and when he had travelled a good day ' s journey , he met with a person who was standing fixed at the foot of a poplar , to whom he said , " what is your name , my lad ?
whence are you , and what is your trade ?"
and the lad replied , " my name is lightning ; i am from arrowland , and i can run like the wind ."
" i should like to see a proof of it ," said moscione ; and lightning answered , " wait a moment , and you will see whether it is dust or flour .
" when they had stood waiting a little while , a doe came bounding over the plain , and lightning , letting her pass on some way , to give her the more law , darted after her so rapidly and light of foot , that he would have gone over a place covered with flour without leaving the mark of his shoe , and in four bounds he came up with her .
moscione , amazed at this exploit , asked if he would come and live with him , and promised to pay him royally . so lightning consented , and they went on their way together ; but they had not journeyed many miles when they met another youth , to whom moscione said , " what is your name , comrade ?
what country are you from ?
and what is your trade ?"
" my name ," replied the lad , " is quick - ear ; i am from vale - curious ; and when i put my ear the ground i hear all that is passing in the world without stirring from the spot .
i perceive the monopolies and agreements of tradespeople to raise the prices of things , the ill - offices of courtiers , the appointments of lovers , the plots of robbers , the reports of spies , the complaints of servants , the gossiping of old women , and the oaths of sailors ; so that no one has ever been able to discover so much as my ears can .
"" if that be true ," said moscione , " tell me what they are now saying at my home .
" so the lad put his ear to the ground , and replied , " an old man is talking to his wife , and saying , praised be sol in leo !
i have got rid from my sight of that fellow moscione , that face of old - fashioned crockery , that nail in my heart .
by travelling through the world he will at least become a man , and no longer be such a stupid ass , such a simpleton , such a lose - the - day fellow , such a ---'"" stop , stop !"
cried moscione , " you tell the truth and i believe you .
so come along with me , for you have found the road to good - luck .
"" well and good !"
said the youth .
so they all went on together and travelled ten miles farther , when they met another man , to whom moscione said , " what is your name , my brave fellow ?
where were you born ?
and what can you do in the world ?"
and the man answered , " my name is shoot - straight ; i am from castle aimwell ; and i can shoot with a crossbow so point - blank as to hit a crab - apple in the middle .
"" i should like to see the proof ," said moscione .
so the lad charged his crossbow , took aim , and made a pea leap from the top of a stone ; whereupon moscione took him also like the others into his company .
and they travelled on another day ' s journey , till they came to some people who were building a large pier in the scorching heat of the sun , and who might well say , " boy , put water to the wine , for my heart is burning ."
so moscione had compassion on them , and said , " my masters , how is it you have the head to stand in this furnace , which is fit to roast a buffalo ?"
and one of them answered , " oh , we are as cool as a rose ; for we have a young man here who blows upon us from behind in such a manner that it seems just as if the west wind were blowing ."
" let me see him , i pray ," cried moscione .
so the mason called the lad , and moscione said to him , " tell me , by the life of your father , what is your name ?
what country are you from ?
and what is your profession !"
and the lad replied , " my name is blow - blast ; i am from windy - land ; and i can make all the winds with my mouth .
if you wish for a zephyr , i will breathe one that will send you in transports ; if you wish for a squall , i will throw down houses .
"" seeing is believing ," said moscione .
whereupon blow - blast breathed at first quite gently , so that it seemed to be the wind that blows at posilippo towards evening ; then turning suddenly to some trees , he sent forth such a furious blast that it uprooted a row of oaks . when moscione saw this he took him for a companion ; and travelling on as far again , he met another lad , to whom he said , " what is your name , if i may make so bold ?
whence are you , if one may ask ?
and what is your trade , if it is a fair question ?"
and the lad answered , " my name is strong - back ; i am from valentino ; and i have such strength that i can take a mountain on my back , and it seems to me only a feather .
"" if that be the case ," said moscione , " you deserve to be the king of the custom - house , and you should be chosen for standard - bearer on the first of may .
but i should like to see a proof of what you say .
" then strong - back began to load himself with masses of rock , trunks of trees , and so many other weights that a thousand large waggons could not have carried them ; which , when moscione saw , he agreed with the lad to join him . so they travelled on till they came to fair - flower , the king of which place had a daughter who ran like the wind , and could pass over the waving corn without bending an ear ; and the king had issued a proclamation that whoever could over - take her in running should have her to wife , but whoever was left behind should lose his head . when moscione arrived in this country and heard the proclamation , he went straight to the king , and offered to run with his daughter , making the wise agreement either to win the race or leave his noddle there .
but in the morning he sent to inform the king that he was taken ill , and being unable to run himself he would send another young man in his place .
" come who will !"
said ciannetella ( for that was the king ' s daughter ), " i care not a fig -- it is all one to me .
" so when the great square was filled with people , come to see the race , insomuch that the men swarmed like ants , and the windows and roofs were all as full as an egg , lightning came out and took his station at the top of the square , waiting for the signal .
and lo !
forth came ciannetella , dressed in a little gown , tucked half - way up her legs , and a neat and pretty little shoe with a single sole .
then they placed themselves shoulder to shoulder , and as soon as the tarantara and too - too of the trumpets was heard , off they darted , running at such a rate that their heels touched their shoulders , and in truth they seemed just like hares with the grey - hounds after them , horses broken loose from the stable , or dogs with kettles tied to their tails .
but lightning ( as he was both by name and nature ) left the princess more than a hand ' s - breadth behind him , and came first to the goal .
then you should have heard the huzzaing and shouting , the cries and the uproar , the whistling and clapping of hands of all the people , bawling out , " hurra !
long life to the stranger !"
whereat ciannetella ' s face turned as red as a schoolboy ' s who is going to be whipped , and she stood lost in shame and confusion at seeing herself vanquished .
but as there were to be two heats to the race , she fell to planning how to be revenged for this affront ; and going home , she put a charm into a ring of such power that if any one had it upon his finger his legs would totter so that he would not be able to walk , much less run ; then she sent it as a present to lightning , begging him to wear it on his finger for love of her . quick - ear , who heard this trick plotted between the father and daughter , said nothing , and waited to see the upshot of the affair .
and when , at the trumpeting of the birds , the sun whipped on the night , who sat mounted on the jackass of the shades , they returned to the field , where at the usual signal they fell to plying their heels .
but if ciannetella was like another atalanta , lightning had become no less like an old donkey and a foundered horse , for he could not stir a step .
but shoot - straight , who saw his comrade ' s danger , and heard from quick - ear how matters stood , laid hold of his crossbow and shot a bolt so exactly that it hit lightning ' s finger , and out flew the stone from the ring , in which the virtue of the charm lay ; whereupon his legs , that had been tied , were set free , and with four goat - leaps he passed ciannetella and won the race . the king seeing this victory of a blockhead , the palm thus carried off by a simpleton , the triumph of a fool , bethought himself seriously whether or no he should give him his daughter ; and taking counsel with the wiseacres of his court , they replied that ciannetella was not a mouthful for the tooth of such a miserable dog and lose - the - day bird , and that , without breaking his word , he might commute the promise of his daughter for a gift of crowns , which would be more to the taste of a poor beggar like moscione than all the women in the world . this advice pleased the king , and he asked moscione how much money he would take instead of the wife who had been promised him .
then moscione , after consulting with the others , answered , " i will take as much gold and silver as one of my comrades can carry on his back ."
the king consented ; whereupon they brought strong - back , on whom they began to load bales of ducats , sacks of patacas , large purses full of crowns , barrels of copper money , chests full of chains and rings ; but the more they loaded him the firmer he stood , just like a tower , so that the treasury , the banks , the usurers , and the money - dealers of the city did not suffice , and he sent to all the great people in every direction to borrow their silver candlesticks , basins , jugs , plates , trays , and baskets ; and yet all was not enough to make up the full load .
at length they went away , not laden but tired and satisfied . when the councillors saw what heaps and stores these six miserable dogs were carrying off , they said to the king that it was a great piece of assery to load them with all the sinews of his kingdom , and that it would be well to send people after them to lessen the load of that atlas who was carrying on his shoulders a heaven of treasure .
the king gave ear to this advice , and immediately despatched a party of armed men , foot and horse , to overtake moscione and his friends .
but quick - ear , who had heard this counsel , informed his comrades ; and while the dust was rising to the sky from the trampling of those who were coming to unload the rich cargo , blow - blast , seeing that things were come to a bad pass , began to blow at such a rate that he not only made the enemies fall flat on the ground , but he sent them flying more than a mile distant , as the north wind does the folks who pass through that country .
so without meeting any more hindrance , moscione arrived at his father ' s house , where he shared the booty with his companions , since , as the saying goes , a good deed deserves a good meed .
so he sent them away content and happy ; but he stayed with his father , rich beyond measure , and saw himself a simpleton laden with gold , not giving the lie to the saying --" heaven sends biscuits to him who has no teeth ."
