the robber ' s wife does not always laugh ; he who weaves fraud works his own ruin ; there is no deceit which is not at last discovered , no treachery that does not come to light ; walls have ears , and are spies to rogues ; the earth gapes and discovers theft , as i will prove to you if you pay attention . there was once in the city of dark - grotto a certain man named minecco aniello , who was so persecuted by fortune that all his fixtures and moveables consisted only of a short - legged cock , which he had reared upon bread - crumbs .
but one morning , being pinched with appetite ( for hunger drives the wolf from the thicket ), he took it into his head to sell the cock , and , taking it to the market , he met two thievish magicians , with whom he made a bargain , and sold it for half - a - crown .
so they told him to take it to their house , and they would count him out the money .
then the magicians went their way , and , minecco aniello following them , overheard them talking gibberish together and saying , " who would have told us that we should meet with such a piece of good luck , jennarone ?
this cock will make our fortune to a certainty by the stone which , you know , he has in his pate .
we will quickly have it set in a ring , and then we shall have everything we can ask for .
"" be quiet , jacovuccio ," answered jennarone ; " i see myself rich and can hardly believe it , and i am longing to twist the cock ' s neck and give a kick in the face of beggary , for in this world virtue without money goes for nothing , and a man is judged of by his coat .
" when minecco aniello , who had travelled about in the world and eaten bread from more than one oven , heard this gibberish he turned on his heel and scampered off .
and , running home , he twisted the cock ' s neck , and opening its head found the stone , which he had instantly set in a brass ring .
then , to make a trial of its virtue , he said , " i wish to become a youth eighteen years old .
" hardly had he uttered the words when his blood began to flow more quickly , his nerves became stronger , his limbs firmer , his flesh fresher , his eyes more fiery , his silver hairs were turned into gold , his mouth , which was a sacked village , became peopled with teeth ; his beard , which was as thick as a wood , became like a nursery garden -- in short , he was changed to a most beautiful youth .
then he said again , " i wish for a splendid palace , and to marry the king ' s daughter ."
and lo !
there instantly appeared a palace of incredible magnificence , in which were apartments that would amaze you , columns to astound you , pictures to fill you with wonder ; silver glittered around , and gold was trodden underfoot ; the jewels dazzled your eyes ; the servants swarmed like ants , the horses and carriages were not to be counted -- in short , there was such a display of riches that the king stared at the sight , and willingly gave him his daughter natalizia . meanwhile the magicians , having discovered minecco aniello ' s great wealth , laid a plan to rob him of his good fortune , so they made a pretty little doll which played and danced by means of clockwork ; and , dressing themselves like merchants , they went to pentella , the daughter of minecco aniello , under pretext of selling it to her .
when pentella saw the beautiful little thing she asked them what price they put upon it , and they replied that it was not to be bought with money , but that she might have it and welcome if she would only do them a favour , which was to let them see the make of the ring which her father possessed , in order to take the model and make another like it , then they would give her the doll without any payment at all . pentella , who had never heard the proverb , " think well before you buy anything cheap ," instantly accepted this offer , and , bidding them return the next morning , she promised to ask her father to lend her the ring .
so the magicians went away , and when her father returned home pentella coaxed and caressed him , until at last she persuaded him to give her the ring , making the excuse that she was sad at heart , and wished to divert her mind a little . when the next day came , as soon as the scavenger of the sun sweeps the last traces of the shades from the streets and squares of heaven , the magicians returned , and no sooner had they the ring in their hands than they instantly vanished , and not a trace of them was to be seen , so that poor pentella had like to have died with terror . but when the magicians came to a wood , where the branches of some of the trees were dancing the sword - dance , and the boughs of the others were playing together at hot - cockles , they desired the ring to destroy the spell by which the old man had become young again .
and instantly minecco aniello , who was just at that moment in the presence of the king , was suddenly seen to grow hoary , his hairs to whiten , his forehead to wrinkle , his eyebrows to grow bristly , his eyes to sink in , his face to be furrowed , his mouth to become toothless , his beard to grow bushy , his back to be humped , his legs to tremble , and , above all , his glittering garments to turn to rags and tatters . the king , seeing the miserable beggar seated beside him at table , ordered him to be instantly driven away with blows and hard words , whereupon aniello , thus suddenly fallen from his good luck , went weeping to his daughter , and asked for the ring in order to set matters to rights again .
but when he heard the fatal trick played by the false merchants he was ready to throw himself out of the window , cursing a thousand times the ignorance of his daughter , who , for the sake of a silly doll had turned him into a miserable scarecrow , and for a paltry thing of rags had brought him to rags himself , adding that he was resolved to go wandering about the world like a bad shilling , until he should get tidings of those merchants .
so saying he threw a cloak about his neck and a wallet on his back , drew his sandals on his feet , took a staff in his hand , and , leaving his daughter all chilled and frozen , he set out walking desperately on and on until he arrived at the kingdom of deep - hole , inhabited by the mice , where , being taken for a big spy of the cats , he was instantly led before rosecone , the king .
then the king asked him who he was , whence he came , and what he was about in that country ; and minecco aniello , after first giving the king a cheese - paring , in sign of tribute , related to him all his misfortunes one by one , and concluded by saying that he was resolved to continue his toil and travel , until he should get tidings of those thievish villains who had robbed him of so precious a jewel , taking from him at once the flower of his youth , the source of his wealth , and the prop of his honour . at these words rosecone felt pity nibbling at his heart , and , wishing to comfort the poor man , he summoned the eldest mice to a council , and asked their opinions on the misfortunes of minecco aniello , commanding them to use all diligence and endeavour to obtain some tidings of these false merchants .
now , among the rest , it happened that rudolo and saltariello were present -- mice who were well used to the ways of the world , and had lived for six years at a tavern of great resort hard by ; and they said to aniello , " be of good heart , comrade !
matters will turn out better than you imagine .
you must know that one day , when we were in a room in the hostelry of the horn ,' where the most famous men in the world lodge and make merry , two persons from hook castle came in , who , after they had eaten their fill and had seen the bottom of their flagon , fell to talking of a trick they had played a certain old man of dark - grotto , and how they had cheated him out of a stone of great value , which one of them , named jennarone , said he would never take from his finger , that he might not run the risk of losing it as the old man ' s daughter had done .
" when minecco aniello heard this , he told the two mice that if they would trust themselves to accompany him to the country where these rogues lived and recover the ring for him , he would give them a good lot of cheese and salt meat , which they might eat and enjoy with his majesty the king .
then the two mice , after bargaining for a reward , offered to go over sea and mountain , and , taking leave of his mousy majesty , they set out . after journeying a long way they arrived at hook castle , where the mice told minecco aniello to remain under some trees on the brink of a river , which like a leech drew the moisture from the land and discharged it into the sea .
then they went to seek the house of the magicians , and , observing that jennarone never took the ring from his finger , they sought to gain the victory by stratagem .
so , waiting till night had dyed with purple grape - juice the sunburnt face of heaven , and the magicians had gone to bed and were fast asleep , rudolo began to nibble the finger on which the ring was , whereupon jennarone , feeling the smart , took the ring off and laid it on a table at the head of the bed .
but as soon as saltariello saw this , he popped the ring into his mouth , and in four skips he was off to find minecco aniello , who , with even greater joy than a man at the gallows feels when a pardon arrives , instantly turned the magicians into two jackasses ; and , turning his mantle over one of them , he bestrode him like a noble count , then he loaded the other with cheese and bacon , and set off toward deep - hole , where , having given presents to the king and his councillors , he thanked them for all the good fortune he had received by their assistance , praying heaven that no mouse - trap might ever lay hold of them , that no cat might ever harm them , and that no arsenic might ever poison them . then , leaving that country , minecco aniello returned to dark - grotto even more handsome than before , and was received by the king and his daughter with the greatest affection in the world .
and , having ordered the two asses to be cast down from a rock , he lived happily with his wife , never more taking the ring from his finger that he might not again commit such a folly , for --" the cat who has been burnt with fire ever after fears the cold hearthstone ."
