there was once upon a time a tailor who had three sons , and only one goat .
but as the goat supported the whole of them with her milk , she was obliged to have good food , and to be taken every day to pasture .
the sons , therefore , did this , in turn .
once the eldest took her to the churchyard , where the finest herbs were to be found , and let her eat and run about there .
at night when it was time to go home he asked , " goat , hast thou had enough ?"
the goat answered ," i have eaten so much , not a leaf more i ' ll touch , meh !
meh !"
" come home , then ," said the youth , and took hold of the cord round her neck , led her into the stable and tied her up securely .
" well ," said the old tailor , " has the goat had as much food as she ought ?"
- " oh ," answered the son , " she has eaten so much , not a leaf more she ' ll touch ."
but the father wished to satisfy himself , and went down to the stable , stroked the dear animal and asked , " goat , art thou satisfied ?"
the goat answered ," wherewithal should i be satisfied ? among the graves i leapt about , and found no food , so went without , meh !
meh !"
" what do i hear ?"
cried the tailor , and ran upstairs and said to the youth , " hollo , thou liar : thou saidest the goat had had enough , and hast let her hunger !"
and in his anger he took the yard - measure from the wall , and drove him out with blows . next day it was the turn of the second son , who looked out for a place in the fence of the garden , where nothing but good herbs grew , and the goat cleared them all off . at night when he wanted to go home , he asked , " goat , art thou satisfied ?"
the goat answered ," i have eaten so much , not a leaf more i ' ll touch , meh !
meh !"
" come home , then ," said the youth , and led her home , and tied her up in the stable .
" well ," said the old tailor , " has the goat had as much food as she ought ?"
- " oh ," answered the son , " she has eaten so much , not a leaf more she ' ll touch ."
the tailor would not rely on this , but went down to the stable and said , " goat , hast thou had enough ?"
the goat answered ," wherewithal should i be satisfied ? among the graves i leapt about , and found no food , so went without , meh !
meh !"
" the godless wretch !"
cried the tailor , " to let such a good animal hunger ," and he ran up and drove the youth out of doors with the yard - measure . now came the turn of the third son , who wanted to do the thing well , and sought out some bushes with the finest leaves , and let the goat devour them .
in the evening when he wanted to go home , he asked , " goat , hast thou had enough ?"
the goat answered ," i have eaten so much , not a leaf more i ' ll touch , meh !
meh !"
" come home , then ," said the youth , and led her into the stable , and tied her up .
" well ," said the old tailor , " has the goat had a proper amount of food ?"
- " she has eaten so much , not a leaf more she ' ll touch ."
the tailor did not trust to that , but went down and asked , " goat , hast thou had enough ?"
the wicked beast answered ," wherewithal should i be satisfied ? among the graves i leapt about , and found no leaves , so went without , meh !
meh !"
" oh , the brood of liars !"
cried the tailor , " each as wicked and forgetful of his duty as the other !
ye shall no longer make a fool of me ," and quite beside himself with anger , he ran upstairs and belabored the poor young fellow so vigorously with the yard - measure that he sprang out of the house . the old tailor was now alone with his goat .
next morning he went down into the stable , caressed the goat and said , " come , my dear little animal , i will take thee to feed myself ."
he took her by the rope and conducted her to green hedges , and amongst milfoil , and whatever else goats like to eat .
" there thou mayest for once eat to thy heart ' s content ," said he to her , and let her browse till evening .
then he asked , " goat , art thou satisfied ?"
she replied ," i have eaten so much , not a leaf more i ' ll touch , meh !
meh !"
" come home , then ," said the tailor , and led her into the stable , and tied her fast .
when he was going away , he turned round again and said , " well , art thou satisfied for once ?"
but the goat did not behave the better to him , and cried ," wherewithal should i be satisfied ? among the graves i leapt about , and found no leaves , so went without , meh !
meh !"
when the tailor heard that , he was shocked , and saw clearly that he had driven away his three sons without cause .
" wait , thou ungrateful creature ," cried he , " it is not enough to drive thee forth , i will mark thee so that thou wilt no more dare to show thyself amongst honest tailors ."
in great haste he ran upstairs , fetched his razor , lathered the goat ' s head , and shaved her as clean as the palm of his hand .
and as the yard - measure would have been too good for her , he brought the horsewhip , and gave her such cuts with it that she ran away in violent haste . when the tailor was thus left quite alone in his house he fell into great grief , and would gladly have had his sons back again , but no one knew whither they were gone .
the eldest had apprenticed himself to a joiner , and learnt industriously and indefatigably , and when the time came for him to go travelling , his master presented him with a little table which had no particular appearance , and was made of common wood , but it had one good property ; if anyone set it out , and said , " little table , spread thyself ," the good little table was at once covered with a clean little cloth , and a plate was there , and a knife and fork beside it , and dishes with boiled meats and roasted meats , as many as there was room for , and a great glass of red wine shone so that it made the heart glad .
the young journeyman thought , " with this thou hast enough for thy whole life ," and went joyously about the world and never troubled himself at all whether an inn was good or bad , or if anything was to be found in it or not .
when it suited him he did not enter an inn at all , but either on the plain , in a wood , a meadow , or wherever he fancied , he took his little table off his back , set it down before him , and said , " cover thyself ," and then everything appeared that his heart desired .
at length he took it into his head to go back to his father , whose anger would now be appeased , and who would now willingly receive him with his wishing - table .
it came to pass that on his way home , he came one evening to an inn which was filled with guests .
they bade him welcome , and invited him to sit and eat with them , for otherwise he would have difficulty in getting anything .
" no ," answered the joiner , " i will not take the few bites out of your mouths ; rather than that , you shall be my guests ."
they laughed , and thought he was jesting with them ; he , however , placed his wooden table in the middle of the room , and said , " little table , cover thyself ."
instantly it was covered with food , so good that the host could never have procured it , and the smell of it ascended pleasantly to the nostrils of the guests .
" fall to , dear friends ," said the joiner ; and the guests when they saw that he meant it , did not need to be asked twice , but drew near , pulled out their knives and attacked it valiantly .
and what surprised them the most was that when a dish became empty , a full one instantly took its place of its own accord .
the innkeeper stood in one corner and watched the affair ; he did not at all know what to say , but thought , " thou couldst easily find a use for such a cook as that in thy kitchen ."
the joiner and his comrades made merry until late into the night ; at length they lay down to sleep , and the young apprentice also went to bed , and set his magic table against the wall .
the host ' s thoughts , however , let him have no rest ; it occurred to him that there was a little old table in his lumber - room which looked just like the apprentice ' s and he brought it out quite softly , and exchanged it for the wishing - table .
next morning , the joiner paid for his bed , took up his table , never thinking that he had got a false one , and went his way .
at mid - day he reached his father , who received him with great joy .
" well , my dear son , what hast thou learnt ?"
said he to him .
" father , i have become a joiner ."
- " a good trade ," replied the old man ; " but what hast thou brought back with thee from thy apprenticeship ?"
- " father , the best thing which i have brought back with me is this little table ."
the tailor inspected it on all sides and said , " thou didst not make a masterpiece when thou mad ' st that ; it is a bad old table ."
- " but it is a table which furnishes itself ," replied the son .
" when i set it out , and tell it to cover itself , the most beautiful dishes stand on it , and a wine also , which gladdens the heart .
just invite all our relations and friends , they shall refresh and enjoy themselves for once , for the table will give them all they require ."
when the company was assembled , he put his table in the middle of the room and said , " little table , cover thyself ," but the little table did not bestir itself , and remained just as bare as any other table which did not understand language .
then the poor apprentice became aware that his table had been changed , and was ashamed at having to stand there like a liar .
the relations , however , mocked him , and were forced to go home without having eaten or drunk .
the father brought out his patches again , and went on tailoring , but the son went to a master in the craft . the second son had gone to a miller and had apprenticed himself to him .
when his years were over , the master said , " as thou hast conducted thyself so well , i give thee an ass of a peculiar kind , which neither draws a cart nor carries a sack ."
- " to what use is he put , then ?"
asked the young apprentice .
" he lets gold drop from his mouth ," answered the miller .
" if thou settest him on a cloth and sayest ' bricklebrit ,' the good animal will drop gold pieces for thee ."
- " that is a fine thing ," said the apprentice , and thanked the master , and went out into the world .
when he had need of gold , he had only to say " bricklebrit " to his ass , and it rained gold pieces , and he had nothing to do but pick them off the ground .
wheresoever he went , the best of everything was good enough for him , and the dearer the better , for he had always a full purse .
when he had looked about the world for some time , he thought , " thou must seek out thy father ; if thou goest to him with the gold - ass he will forget his anger , and receive thee well ."
it came to pass that he came to the same public - house in which his brother ' s table had been exchanged .
he led his ass by the bridle , and the host was about to take the animal from him and tie him up , but the young apprentice said , " don ' t trouble yourself , i will take my grey horse into the stable , and tie him up myself too , for i must know where he stands ."
this struck the host as odd , and he thought that a man who was forced to look after his ass himself , could not have much to spend ; but when the stranger put his hand in his pocket and brought out two gold pieces , and said he was to provide something good for him , the host opened his eyes wide , and ran and sought out the best he could muster .
after dinner the guest asked what he owed .
the host did not see why he should not double the reckoning , and said the apprentice must give two more gold pieces .
he felt in his pocket , but his gold was just at an end .
" wait an instant , sir host ," said he , " i will go and fetch some money ;" but he took the table - cloth with him .
the host could not imagine what this could mean , and being curious , stole after him , and as the guest bolted the stable - door , he peeped through a hole left by a knot in the wood .
the stranger spread out the cloth under the animal and cried , " bricklebrit ," and immediately the beast began to let gold pieces fall , so that it fairly rained down money on the ground .
" eh , my word ," said the host , " ducats are quickly coined there !
a purse like that is not amiss ."
the guest paid his score , and went to bed , but in the night the host stole down into the stable , led away the master of the mint , and tied up another ass in his place .
early next morning the apprentice travelled away with his ass , and thought that he had his gold - ass .
at mid - day he reached his father , who rejoiced to see him again , and gladly took him in .
" what hast thou made of thyself , my son ?"
asked the old man .
" a miller ," dear father , he answered .
" what hast thou brought back with thee from thy travels ?"
- " nothing else but an ass ."
- " there are asses enough here ," said the father , " i would rather have had a good goat ."
- " yes ," replied the son , " but it is no common ass , but a gold - ass , when i say ' bricklebrit ,' the good beast opens its mouth and drops a whole sheetful of gold pieces .
just summon all our relations hither , and i will make them rich folks ."
- " that suits me well ," said the tailor , " for then i shall have no need to torment myself any longer with the needle ," and ran out himself and called the relations together .
as soon as they were assembled , the miller bade them make way , spread out his cloth , and brought the ass into the room .
" now watch ," said he , and cried , " bricklebrit ," but no gold pieces fell , and it was clear that the animal knew nothing of the art , for every ass does not attain such perfection .
then the poor miller pulled a long face , saw that he was betrayed , and begged pardon of the relatives , who went home as poor as they came .
there was no help for it , the old man had to betake him to his needle once more , and the youth hired himself to a miller . the third brother had apprenticed himself to a turner , and as that is skilled labour , he was the longest in learning .
his brothers , however , told him in a letter how badly things had gone with them , and how the innkeeper had cheated them of their beautiful wishing - gifts on the last evening before they reached home .
when the turner had served his time , and had to set out on his travels , as he had conducted himself so well , his master presented him with a sack and said , " there is a cudgel in it ."
- " i can put on the sack ," said he , " and it may be of good service to me , but why should the cudgel be in it ?
it only makes it heavy ."
- " i will tell thee why ," replied the master ; " if any one has done anything to injure thee , do but say , ' out of the sack , cudgel !'
and the cudgel will leap forth among the people , and play such a dance on their backs that they will not be able to stir or move for a week , and it will not leave off until thou sayest , " into the sack , cudgel !"
the apprentice thanked him , and put the sack on his back , and when any one came too near him , and wished to attack him , he said , " out of the sack , cudgel !"
and instantly the cudgel sprang out , and dusted the coat or jacket of one after the other on their backs , and never stopped until it had stripped it off them , and it was done so quickly , that before anyone was aware , it was already his own turn .
in the evening the young turner reached the inn where his brothers had been cheated .
he laid his sack on the table before him , and began to talk of all the wonderful things which he had seen in the world .
" yes ," said he , " people may easily find a table which will cover itself , a gold - ass , and things of that kind -- extremely good things which i by no means despise -- but these are nothing in comparison with the treasure which i have won for myself , and am carrying about with me in my sack there ."
the inn - keeper pricked up his ears , " what in the world can that be ?"
thought he ; " the sack must be filled with nothing but jewels ; i ought to get them cheap too , for all good things go in threes ."
when it was time for sleep , the guest stretched himself on the bench , and laid his sack beneath him for a pillow .
when the inn - keeper thought his guest was lying in a sound sleep , he went to him and pushed and pulled quite gently and carefully at the sack to see if he could possibly draw it away and lay another in its place .
the turner had , however , been waiting for this for a long time , and now just as the inn - keeper was about to give a hearty tug , he cried , " out of the sack , cudgel !"
instantly the little cudgel came forth , and fell on the inn - keeper and gave him a sound thrashing .
the host cried for mercy ; but the louder he cried , so much more heavily the cudgel beat the time on his back , until at length he fell to the ground exhausted .
then the turner said , " if thou dost not give back the table which covers itself , and the gold - ass , the dance shall begin afresh ."
- " oh , no ," cried the host , quite humbly , " i will gladly produce everything , only make the accursed kobold creep back into the sack ."
then said the apprentice , " i will let mercy take the place of justice , but beware of getting into mischief again !"
so he cried , " into the sack , cudgel !"
and let him have rest . next morning the turner went home to his father with the wishing - table , and the gold - ass .
the tailor rejoiced when he saw him once more , and asked him likewise what he had learned in foreign parts .
" dear father ," said he , " i have become a turner ."
- " a skilled trade ," said the father .
" what hast thou brought back with thee from thy travels ?"
- " a precious thing , dear father ," replied the son , " a cudgel in the sack ."
- " what !"
cried the father , " a cudgel !
that ' s worth thy trouble , indeed !
from every tree thou can cut thyself one ."
- " but not one like this , dear father .
if i say , ' out of the sack , cudgel !'
the cudgel springs out and leads any one who means ill with me a weary dance , and never stops until he lies on the ground and prays for fair weather .
look you , with this cudgel have i got back the wishing - table and the gold - ass which the thievish inn - keeper took away from my brothers .
now let them both be sent for , and invite all our kinsmen .
i will give them to eat and to drink , and will fill their pockets with gold into the bargain ."
the old tailor would not quite believe , but nevertheless got the relatives together .
then the turner spread a cloth in the room and led in the gold - ass , and said to his brother , " now , dear brother , speak to him ."
the miller said , " bricklebrit ," and instantly the gold pieces fell down on the cloth like a thunder - shower , and the ass did not stop until every one of them had so much that he could carry no more .
( i can see in thy face that thou also wouldst like to be there .)
then the turner brought the little table , and said , " now dear brother , speak to it ."
and scarcely had the carpenter said , " table , cover thyself ," than it was spread and amply covered with the most exquisite dishes .
then such a meal took place as the good tailor had never yet known in his house , and the whole party of kinsmen stayed together till far in the night , and were all merry and glad .
the tailor locked away needle and thread , yard - measure and goose , in a press , and lived with his three sons in joy and splendour . what , however , has become of the goat who was to blame for the tailor driving out his three sons ?
that i will tell thee .
she was ashamed that she had a bald head , and ran to a fox ' s hole and crept into it .
when the fox came home , he was met by two great eyes shining out of the darkness , and was terrified and ran away .
a bear met him , and as the fox looked quite disturbed , he said , " what is the matter with thee , brother fox , why dost thou look like that ?"
- " ah ," answered redskin , " a fierce beast is in my cave and stared at me with its fiery eyes ."
- " we will soon drive him out ," said the bear , and went with him to the cave and looked in , but when he saw the fiery eyes , fear seized on him likewise ; he would have nothing to do with the furious beast , and took to his heels .
the bee met him , and as she saw that he was ill at ease , she said , " bear , thou art really pulling a very pitiful face ; what has become of all thy gaiety ?"
- " it is all very well for thee to talk ," replied the bear , " a furious beast with staring eyes is in redskin ' s house , and we can ' t drive him out ."
the bee said , " bear i pity thee , i am a poor weak creature whom thou wouldst not turn aside to look at , but still , i believe , i can help thee ."
she flew into the fox ' s cave , lighted on the goat ' s smoothly - shorn head , and stung her so violently , that she sprang up , crying " meh , meh ," and ran forth into the world as if mad , and to this hour no one knows where she has gone .
