once upon a time the king of green - bank had three daughters , who were perfect jewels , with whom three sons of the king of fair - meadow were desperately in love .
but these princes having been changed into animals by the spell of a fairy , the king of green - bank disdained to give them his daughters to wife .
whereupon the first , who was a beautiful falcon , called together all the birds to a council ; and there came the chaffinches , tomtits , woodpeckers , fly - catchers , jays , blackbirds , cuckoos , thrushes , and every other kind of bird .
and when they were all assembled at his summons , he ordered them to destroy all the blossoms on the trees of green - bank , so that not a flower or leaf should remain .
the second prince , who was a stag , summoning all the goats , rabbits , hares , hedgehogs , and other animals of that country , laid waste all the corn - fields so that there was not a single blade of grass or corn left .
the third prince , who was a dolphin , consulting together with a hundred monsters of the sea , made such a tempest arise upon the coast that not a boat escaped . now the king saw that matters were going from bad to worse , and that he could not remedy the mischief which these three wild lovers were causing ; so he resolved to get out of his trouble , and made up his mind to give them his daughters to wife ; and thereupon , without wanting either feasts or songs , they carried their brides off and out of the kingdom . on parting from her daughters , granzolla the queen gave each of them a ring , one exactly like the other , telling them that if they happened to be separated , and after a while to meet again , or to see any of their kinsfolk , they would recognise one another by means of these rings .
so taking their leave they departed .
and the falcon carried fabiella , who was the eldest of the sisters , to the top of a mountain , which was so high that , passing the confines of the clouds , it reached with a dry head to a region where it never rains ; and there , leading her to a most beautiful palace , she lived like a queen . the stag carried vasta , the second sister , into a wood , which was so thick that the shades , when summoned by the night , could not find their way out to escort her .
there he placed her , as befitted her rank , in a wonderfully splendid house with a garden . the dolphin swam with rita , the third sister , on his back into the middle of the sea , where , upon a large rock , he showed her a mansion in which three crowned kings might live . meanwhile granzolla gave birth to a fine little boy , whom they named tittone .
and when he was fifteen years old , hearing his mother lamenting continually that she never heard any tidings of her three daughters , who were married to three animals ; he took it into his head to travel through the world until he should obtain some news of them .
so after begging and entreating his father and mother for a long time , they granted him permission , bidding him take for his journey attendants and everything needful and befitting a prince ; and the queen also gave him another ring similar to those she had given to her daughters . tittone went his way , and left no corner of italy , not a nook of france , nor any part of spain unsearched .
then he passed through england , and traversed slavonia , and visited poland , and , in short , travelled both east and west .
at length , leaving all his servants , some at the taverns and some at the hospitals , he set out without a farthing in his pocket , and came to the top of the mountain where dwelt the falcon and fabiella .
and as he stood there , beside himself with amazement , contemplating the beauty of the palace -- the corner - stones of which were of porphyry , the walls of alabaster , the windows of gold , and the tiles of silver -- his sister observed him , and ordering him to be called , she demanded who he was , whence he came , and what chance had brought him to that country .
when tittone told her his country , his father and mother , and his name , fabiella knew him to be her brother , and the more when she compared the ring upon his finger with that which her mother had given her ; and embracing him with great joy , she concealed him , fearing that her husband would be angry when he returned home . as soon as the falcon came home , fabiella began to tell him that a great longing had come over her to see her parents .
and the falcon answered , " let the wish pass , wife ; for that cannot be unless the humour takes me .
"" let us at least ," said fabiella , " send to fetch one of my kinsfolk to keep my company .
"" and , pray , who will come so far to see you ?"
replied the falcon .
" nay , but if any one should come ," added fabiella , " would you be displeased ?
"" why should i be displeased ?"
said the falcon , " it would be enough that he were one of your kinsfolk to make me take him to my heart .
" when fabiella heard this she took courage , and calling to her brother to come forth , she presented him to the falcon , who exclaimed , " five and five are ten ; love passes through the glove , and water through the boot .
a hearty welcome to you !
you are master in this house ; command , and do just as you like ."
then he gave orders that tittone should be served and treated with the same honour as himself . now when tittone had stayed a fortnight on the mountain , it came into his head to go forth and seek his other sisters .
so taking leave of fabiella and his brother - in - law , the falcon gave him one of his feathers , saying , " take this and prize it , my dear tittone ; for you may one day be in trouble , and you will then esteem it a treasure .
enough -- take good care of it ; and if ever you meet with any mishap , throw it on the ground , and say , come hither , come hither !'
and you shall have cause to thank me .
" tittone wrapped the feather up in a sheet of paper , and , putting it in his pocket , after a thousand ceremonies departed .
and travelling on and on a very long way , he arrived at last at the wood where the stag lived with vasta ; and going , half - dead with hunger , into the garden to pluck some fruit , his sister saw him , and recognised him in the same manner as fabiella had done .
then she presented tittone to her husband , who received him with the greatest friendship , and treated him truly like a prince . at the end of a fortnight , when tittone wished to depart , and go in search of his other sister , the stag gave him one of his hairs , repeating the same words as the falcon had spoken about the feather .
and setting out on his way , with a bagful of crown - pieces which the falcon had given him , and as many more which the stag gave him , he walked on and on , until he came to the end of the earth , where , being stopped by the sea and unable to walk any further , he took ship , intending to seek through all the islands for tidings of his sister .
so setting sail , he went about and about , until at length he was carried to an island , where lived the dolphin with rita .
and no sooner had he landed , than his sister saw and recognised him in the same manner as the others had done , and he was received by her husband with all possible affection . now after a while tittone wished to set out again to go and visit his father and mother , whom he had not seen for so long a time .
so the dolphin gave him one of his scales , telling him the same as the others had ; and tittone , mounting a horse , set out on his travels .
but he had hardly proceeded half a mile from the seashore , when entering a wood -- the abode of fear and the shades , where a continual fair of darkness and terror was kept up -- he found a great tower in the middle of a lake , whose waters were kissing the feet of the trees , and entreating them not to let the sun witness their pranks .
at a window in the tower tittone saw a most beautiful maiden sitting at the feet of a hideous dragon , who was asleep .
when the damsel saw tittone , she said in a low and piteous voice , " o noble youth , sent perchance by heaven to comfort me in my miseries in this place , where the face of a christian is never seen , release me from the power of this tyrannical serpent , who has carried me off from my father , the king of bright - valley , and shut me up in this frightful tower , where i must die a miserable death .
"" alas , my beauteous lady !"
replied tittone , " what can i do to serve thee ?
who can pass this lake ?
who can climb this tower ?
who can approach yon horrid dragon , that carries terror in his look , sows fear , and causes dismay to spring up ?
but softly , wait a minute , and we ' ll find a way with another ' s help to drive this serpent away .
step by step -- the more haste , the worse speed : we shall soon see whether tis egg or wind ."
and so saying he threw the feather , the hair , and the scale , which his brothers - in - law had given him , on the ground , exclaiming , " come hither , come hither !"
and falling on the earth like drops of summer rain , which makes the frogs spring up , suddenly there appeared the falcon , the stag , and the dolphin , who cried out all together , " behold us here !
what are your commands ?
" when tittone saw this , he said with great joy , " i wish for nothing but to release this poor damsel from the claws of yon dragon , to take her away from this tower , to lay it all in ruins , and to carry this beautiful lady home with me as my wife ."" hush !"
answered the falcon , " for the bean springs up where you least expect it .
we ' ll soon make him dance upon a sixpence , and take good care that he shall have little ground enough .
"" let us lose no time ," said the stag , " troubles and macaroni are swallowed hot .
" so the falcon summoned a large flock of griffins , who , flying to the window of the tower , carried off the damsel , bearing her over the lake to where tittone was standing with his three brothers - in - law ; and if from afar she appeared a moon , believe me , when near she looked truly like a sun , she was so beautiful . whilst tittone was embracing her and telling her how he loved her , the dragon awoke ; and , rushing out of the window , he came swimming across the lake to devour tittone .
but the stag instantly called up a squadron of lions , tigers , panthers , bears , and wild - cats , who , falling upon the dragon , tore him in pieces with their claws .
then tittone wishing to depart , the dolphin said , " i likewise desire to do something to serve you ."
and in order that no trace should remain of the frightful and accursed place , he made the sea rise so high that , overflowing its bounds , it attacked the tower furiously , and overthrew it to its foundations . when tittone saw these things , he thanked the animals in the best manner he could , telling the damsel at the same time that she ought to do so too , as it was by their aid she had escaped from peril .
but the animals answered , " nay , we ought rather to thank this beauteous lady , since she is the means of restoring us to our proper shapes ; for a spell was laid upon us at our birth , caused by our mother ' s having offended a fairy , and we were compelled to remain in the form of animals until we should have freed the daughter of a king from some great trouble .
and now behold the time is arrived which we have longed for ; the fruit is ripe , and we already feel new spirit in our breasts , new blood in our veins ."
so saying , they were changed into three handsome youths , and one after another they embraced their brother - in - law , and shook hands with the lady , who was in an ecstasy of joy . when tittone saw this , he was on the point of fainting away ; and heaving a deep sigh , he said , " o heavens !
why have not my mother and father a share in this happiness ?
they would be out of their wits with joy were they to see such graceful and handsome sons - in - law before their eyes .
"" nay ," answered the princes , " tis not yet night ; the shame at seeing ourselves so transformed obliged us to flee from the sight of men ; but now that , thank heaven !
we can appear in the world again , we will all go and live with our wives under one roof , and spend our lives merrily .
let us , therefore , set out instantly , and before the sun to - morrow morning unpacks the bales of his rays at the custom - house of the east , our wives shall be with you .
" so saying , in order that they might not have to go on foot -- for there was only an old broken - down mare which tittone had brought -- the brothers caused a most beautiful coach to appear , drawn by six lions , in which they all five seated themselves ; and having travelled the whole day , they came in the evening to a tavern , where , whilst the supper was being prepared , they passed the time in reading all the proofs of men ' s ignorance which were scribbled upon the walls .
at length , when all had eaten their fill and retired to rest , the three youths , feigning to go to bed , went out and walked about the whole night long , till in the morning , when the stars , like bashful maidens , retire from the gaze of the sun , they found themselves in the same inn with their wives , whereupon there was a great embracing , and a joy beyond the beyonds .
then they all eight seated themselves in the same coach , and after a long journey arrived at green - bank , where they were received with incredible affection by the king and queen , who had not only regained the capital of four children , whom they had considered lost , but likewise the interest of three sons - in - law and a daughter - in - law , who were verily four columns of the temple of beauty .
and when the news of the adventures of their children was brought to the kings of fair - meadow and bright - valley , they both came to the feasts which were made , adding the rich ingredient of joy to the porridge of their satisfaction , and receiving a full recompense for all their past misfortunes ; for --" one hour of joy dispels the cares and sufferings of a thousand years ."
