he who seeks the injury of another finds his own hurt ; and he who spreads the snares of treachery and deceit often falls into them himself ; as you shall hear in the story of a queen , who with her own hands constructed the trap in which she was caught by the foot . there was one time a king of high - shore , who practised such tyranny and cruelty that , whilst he was once gone on a visit of pleasure to a castle at a distance from the city , his royal seat was usurped by a certain sorceress .
whereupon , having consulted a wooden statue which used to give oracular responses , it answered that he would recover his dominions when the sorceress should lose her sight .
but seeing that the sorceress , besides being well guarded , knew at a glance the people whom he sent to annoy her , and did dog ' s justice upon them , he became quite desperate , and out of spite to her he killed all the women of that place whom he could get into his hands . now after hundreds and hundreds had been led thither by their ill - luck , only to lose their lives , there chanced , among others , to come a maiden named porziella , the most beautiful creature that could be seen on the whole earth , and the king could not help falling in love with her and making her his wife .
but he was so cruel and spiteful to women that , after a while , he was going to kill her like the rest ; but just as he was raising the dagger a bird let fall a certain root upon his arm , and he was seized with such a trembling that the weapon fell from his hand .
this bird was a fairy , who , a few days before , having gone to sleep in a wood , where beneath the tent of the shades fear kept watch and defied the sun ' s heat , a certain satyr was about to rob her when she was awakened by porziella , and for this kindness she continually followed her steps in order to make her a return . when the king saw this , he thought that the beauty of porziella ' s face had arrested his arm and bewitched the dagger to prevent its piercing her as it had done so many others .
he resolved , therefore , not to make the attempt a second time , but that she should die built up in a garret of his palace .
no sooner said than done : the unhappy creature was enclosed within four walls , without having anything to eat or drink , and left to waste away and die little by little . the bird , seeing her in this wretched state , consoled her with kind words , bidding her be of good cheer , and promising , in return for the great kindness she had done for her , to aid her if necessary with her very life .
in spite , however , of all the entreaties of porziella , the bird would never tell her who she was , but only said that she was under obligations to her , and would leave nothing undone to serve her .
and seeing that the poor girl was famished with hunger , she flew out and speedily returned with a pointed knife which she had taken from the king ' s pantry , and told her to make a hole in the corner of the floor just over the kitchen , through which she would regularly bring her food to sustain her life .
so porziella bored away until she had made a passage for the bird , who , watching till the cook was gone out to fetch a pitcher of water from the well , went down through the hole , and taking a fine fowl that was cooking at the fire , brought it to porziella ; then to relieve her thirst , not knowing how to carry her any drink , she flew to the pantry , where there was a quantity of grapes hanging , and brought her a fine bunch ; and this she did regularly for many days . meanwhile porziella gave birth to a fine little boy , whom she suckled and reared with the constant aid of the bird .
and when he was grown big , the fairy advised his mother to make the hole larger , and to raise so many boards of the floor as would allow miuccio ( for so the child was called ) to pass through ; and then , after letting him down with some cords which the bird brought , to put the boards back into their place , that it might not be seen where he came from .
so porziella did as the bird directed her ; and as soon as the cook was gone out , she let down her son , desiring him never to tell whence he came nor whose son he was . when the cook returned and saw such a fine little boy , he asked him who he was , whence he came , and what he wanted ; whereupon , the child , remembering his mother ' s advice , said that he was a poor forlorn boy who was looking about for a master .
as they were talking , the butler came in , and seeing the spritely little fellow , he thought he would make a pretty page for the king .
so he led him to the royal apartments ; and when the king saw him look so handsome and lovely that he appeared a very jewel , he was vastly pleased with him , and took him into his service as a page and to his heart as a son , and had him taught all the exercises befitting a cavalier , so that miuccio grew up the most accomplished one in the court , and the king loved him much better than his stepson .
now the king ' s stepmother , who was really the queen , on this account began to take a dislike to him , and to hold him in aversion ; and her envy and malice gained ground just in proportion as the favours and kindness which the king bestowed on miuccio cleared the way for them ; so she resolved to soap the ladder of his fortune in order that he should tumble down from top to bottom . accordingly one evening , when the king and his stepmother had tuned their instruments together and were making music of their discourse , the queen told the king that miuccio had boasted he would build three castles in the air .
so the next morning , at the time when the moon , the school - mistress of the shades , gives a holiday to her scholars for the festival of the sun , the king , either from surprise or to gratify the old queen , ordered miuccio to be called , and commanded him forthwith to build the three castles in the air as he had promised , or else he would make him dance a jig in the air . when miuccio heard this he went to his chamber and began to lament bitterly , seeing what glass the favour of princes is , and how short a time it lasts .
and while he was weeping thus , lo !
the bird came , and said to him , " take heart , miuccio , and fear not while you have me by your side , for i am able to draw you out of the fire ."
then she directed him to take pasteboard and glue and make three large castles ; and calling up three large griffins , she tied a castle to each , and away they flew up into the air .
thereupon miuccio called the king , who came running with all his court to see the sight ; and when he saw the ingenuity of miuccio he had a still greater affection for him , and lavished on him caresses of the other world , which added snow to the envy of the queen and fire to her rage , seeing that all her plans failed ; insomuch that , both sleeping and waking , she was for ever thinking of some way to remove this thorn from her eyes .
so at last , after some days , she said to the king , " son , the time is now come for us to return to our former greatness and the pleasures of past times , since miuccio has offered to blind the sorceress , and by the disbursement of her eyes to make you recover your lost kingdom .
" the king , who felt himself touched in the sore place , called for miuccio that very instant , and said to him , " i am greatly surprised that , notwithstanding all my love for you , and that you have the power to restore me to the seat from which i have fallen , you remain thus careless , instead of endeavouring to relieve me from the misery i am in -- reduced thus from a kingdom to a wood , from a city to a paltry castle , and from commanding so great a people to be hardly waited on by a parcel of half - starved menials .
if , therefore , you do not wish me ill , run now at once and blind the eyes of the fairy who has possession of my property , for by putting out her lanterns you will light the lamps of my honour that are now dark and dismal .
" when miuccio heard this proposal he was about to reply that the king was ill - informed and had mistaken him , as he was neither a raven to pick out eyes nor an auger to bore holes ; but the king said , " no more words -- so i will have it , so let it be done !
remember now , that in the mint of this brain of mine i have the balance ready ; in one scale the reward , if you do what i tell you ; in the other the punishment , if you neglect doing what i command .
" miuccio , who could not butt against a rock , and had to do with a man who was not to be moved , went into a corner to bemoan himself ; and the bird came to him and said , " is it possible , miuccio , that you will always be drowning yourself in a tumbler of water ?
if i were dead indeed you could not make more fuss .
do you not know that i have more regard for your life than for my own ?
therefore don ' t lose courage ; come with me , and you shall see what i can do ."
so saying off she flew , and alighted in the wood , where as soon as she began to chirp , there came a large flock of birds about her , to whom she told the story , assuring them that whoever would venture to deprive the sorceress of sight should have from her a safeguard against the talons of the hawks and kites , and a letter of protection against the guns , crossbows , longbows , and bird - lime of the fowlers . there was among them a swallow who had made her nest against a beam of the royal palace , and who hated the sorceress , because , when making her accursed conjurations , she had several times driven her out of the chamber with her fumigations ; for which reason , partly out of a desire of revenge , and partly to gain the reward that the bird promised , she offered herself to perform the service .
so away she flew like lightning to the city , and entering the palace , found the fairy lying on a couch , with two damsels fanning her .
then the swallow came , and alighting directly over the fairy , pecked out her eyes .
whereupon the fairy , thus seeing night at midday , knew that by this closing of the custom - house the merchandise of the kingdom was all lost ; and uttering yells , as of a condemned soul , she abandoned the sceptre and went off to hide herself in a certain cave , where she knocked her head continually against the wall , until at length she ended her days . when the sorceress was gone , the councillors sent ambassadors to the king , praying him to come back to his castle , since the blinding of the sorceress had caused him to see this happy day .
and at the same time they arrived came also miuccio , who , by the bird ' s direction , said to the king , " i have served you to the best of my power ; the sorceress is blinded , the kingdom is yours .
wherefore , if i deserve recompense for this service , i wish for no other than to be left to my ill - fortune , without being again exposed to these dangers .
" but the king , embracing him with great affection , bade him put on his cap and sit beside him ; and how the queen was enraged at this , heaven knows , for by the bow of many colours that appeared in her face might be known the wind of the storm that was brewing in her heart against poor miuccio . not far from this castle lived a most ferocious dragon , who was born the same hour with the queen ; and the astrologers being called by her father to astrologise on this event , said that his daughter would be safe as long as the dragon was safe , and that when one died , the other would of necessity die also .
one thing alone could bring back the queen to life , and that was to anoint her temples , chest , nostrils , and pulse with the blood of the same dragon . now the queen , knowing the strength and fury of this animal , resolved to sendmiuccio into his claws , well assured that the beast would make but a mouthful of him , and that he would be like a strawberry in the throat of a bear .
so turning to the king , she said , " upon my word , this miuccio is the treasure of your house , and you would be ungrateful indeed if you did not love him , especially as he had expressed his desire to kill the dragon , who , though he is my brother , is nevertheless your enemy ; and i care more for a hair of your head than for a hundred brothers .
" the king , who hated the dragon mortally , and knew not how to remove him out of his sight , instantly called miuccio , and said to him , " i know that you can put your hand to whatever you will ; therefore , as you have done so much , grant me yet another pleasure , and then turn me whithersoever you will .
go this very instant and kill the dragon ; for you will do me a singular service , and i will reward you well for it .
" miuccio at these words was near losing his senses , and as soon as he was able to speak , he said to the king , " alas , what a headache have you given me by your continual teasing !
is my life a black goat - skin rug that you are for ever wearing it away thus ?
this is not a pared pear ready to drop into one ' s mouth , but a dragon , that tears with his claws , breaks to pieces with his head , crushes with his tail , crunches with his teeth , poisons with his eyes , and kills with his breath .
wherefore do you want to send me to death ?
is this the sinecure you give me for having given you a kingdom ?
who is the wicked soul that has set this die on the table ?
what son of perdition has taught you these capers and put these words into your mouth ?"
then the king , who , although he let himself be tossed to and fro as light as a ball , was firmer than a rock in keeping to what he had once said , stamped with his feet , and exclaimed , " after all you have done , do you fail at the last ?
but no more words ; go , rid my kingdom of this plague , unless you would have me rid you of life .
" poor miuccio , who thus received one minute a favour , at another a threat , now a pat on the face , and now a kick , now a kind word , now a cruel one , reflected how mutable court fortune is , and would fain have been without the acquaintance of the king .
but knowing that to reply to great men is a folly , and like plucking a lion by the beard , he withdrew , cursing his fate , which had led him to the court only to curtail the days of his life .
and as he was sitting on one of the door - steps , with his head between his knees , washing his shoes with his tears and warming the ground with his sighs , behold the bird came flying with a plant in her beak , and throwing it to him , said , " get up , miuccio , and take courage !
for you are not going to play at unload the ass ' with your days , but at backgammon with the life of the dragon .
take this plant , and when you come to the cave of that horrid animal , throw it in , and instantly such a drowsiness will come over him that he will fall fast asleep ; whereupon , nicking and sticking him with a good knife , you may soon make an end of him .
then come away , for things will turn out better than you think ."" enough !"
cried miuccio , " i know what i carry under my belt ; we have more time than money , and he who has time has life ."
so saying , he got up , and sticking a pruning - knife in his belt and taking the plant , he went his way to the dragon ' s cave , which was under a mountain of such goodly growth , that the three mountains that were steps to the giants would not have reached up to its waist .
when he came there , he threw the plant into the cave , and instantly a deep sleep laid hold on the dragon , and miuccio began to cut him in pieces . now just at the time that he was busied thus , the queen felt a cutting pain at her heart ; and seeing herself brought to a bad pass , she perceived her error in having purchased death with ready money .
so she called her stepson and told him what the astrologers had predicted -- how her life depended on that of the dragon , and how she feared that miuccio had killed him , for she felt herself gradually sliding away .
then the king replied , " if you knew that the life of the dragon was the prop of your life and the root of your days , why did you make me send miuccio ?
who is in fault ?
you must have done yourself the mischief , and you must suffer for it ; you have broken the glass , and you may pay the cost ."
and the queen answered , " i never thought that such a stripling could have the skill and strength to overthrow an animal which made nothing of an army , and i expected that he would have left his rags there .
but since i reckoned without my host , and the bark of my projects is gone out of its course , do me one kindness if you love me .
when i am dead , take a sponge dipped in the blood of this dragon and anoint with it all the extremities of my body before you bury me .
"" that is but a small thing for the love i bear you ," replied the king ; " and if the blood of the dragon is not enough , i will add my own to give you satisfaction ."
the queen was about to thank him , but the breath left her with the speech ; for just then miuccio had made an end of scoring the dragon . no sooner had miuccio come into the king ' s presence with the news of what he had done than the king ordered him to go back for the dragon ' s blood ; but being curious to see the deed done by miuccio ' s hand , he followed him .
and as miuccio was going out of the palace gate , the bird met him , and said , " whither are you going ?"
and miuccio answered , " i am going whither the king sends me ; he makes me fly backwards and forwards like a shuttle , and never lets me rest an hour ."
" what to do ?"
said the bird .
" to fetch the blood of the dragon ," said miuccio .
and the bird replied , " ah , wretched youth !
this dragon ' s blood will be bull ' s blood to you , and make you burst ; for this blood will cause to spring up again the evil seed of all your misfortunes .
the queen is continually exposing you to new dangers that you may lose your life ; and the king , who lets this odious creature put the pack - saddle on him , orders you , like a castaway , to endanger your person , which is his own flesh and blood and a shoot of his stem .
but the wretched man does not know you , though the inborn affection he bears you should have betrayed your kindred .
moreover , the services you have rendered the king , and the gain to himself of so handsome a son and heir , ought to obtain favour for unhappy porziella , your mother , who has now for fourteen years been buried alive in a garret , where is seen a temple of beauty built up within a little chamber .
" while the fairy was thus speaking , the king , who had heard every word , stepped forward to learn the truth of the matter better ; and finding that miuccio was his own and porziella ' s son , and that porziella was still alive in the garret , he instantly gave orders that she should be set free and brought before him .
and when he saw her looking more beautiful than ever , owing to the care taken of her by the bird , he embraced her with the greatest affection , and was never satisfied with pressing to his heart first the mother and then the son , praying forgiveness of porziella for his ill - treatment of her , and of his son for all the dangers to which he had exposed him .
then he ordered her to be clothed in the richest robes , and had her crowned queen before all the people .
and when the king heard that her preservation , and the escape of his son from so many dangers were entirely owing to the bird , which had given food to the one and counsel to the other , he offered her his kingdom and his life .
but the bird said she desired no other reward for her services than to have miuccio for a husband ; and as she uttered the words she was changed into a beautiful maiden , and , to the great joy and satisfaction of the king and porziella , she was given to miuccio to wife .
then the newly - married couple , to give still greater festivals , went their way to their own kingdom , where they were anxiously expected , every one ascribing this good fortune to the fairy , for the kindness that porziella had done her ; for at the end of the end --" a good deed is never lost ."
