i have always heard say , that he who gives pleasure finds it : the bell of manfredonia says , " give me , i give thee ": he who does not bait the hook of the affections with courtesy never catches the fish of kindness ; and if you wish to hear the proof of this , listen to my story , and then say whether the covetous man does not always lose more than the liberal one . there were once two sisters , named luceta and troccola , who had two daughters , marziella and puccia .
marziella was as fair to look upon as she was good at heart ; whilst , on the contrary , puccia by the same rule had a face of ugliness and a heart of pestilence , but the girl resembled her parent , for troccola was a harpy within and a very scare - crow without . now it happened that luceta had occasion to boil some parsnips , in order to fry them with green sauce ; so she said to her daughter , " marziella , my dear , go to the well and fetch me a pitcher of water .
"" with all my heart , mother ," replied the girl , " but if you love me give me a cake , for i should like to eat it with a draught of the fresh water .
"" by all means ," said the mother ; so she took from a basket that hung upon a hook a beautiful cake ( for she had baked a batch the day before ), and gave it to marziella , who set the pitcher on a pad upon her head , and went to the fountain , which like a charlatan upon a marble bench , to the music of the falling water , was selling secrets to drive away thirst .
and as she was stooping down to fill her pitcher , up came a hump - backed old woman , and seeing the beautiful cake , which marziella was just going to bite , she said to her , " my pretty girl , give me a little piece of your cake , and may heaven send you good fortune !
" marziella , who was as generous as a queen , replied , " take it all , my good woman , and i am only sorry that it is not made of sugar and almonds , for i would equally give it you with all my heart .
" the old woman , seeing marziella ' s kindness , said to her , " go , and may heaven reward you for the goodness you have shown me !
and i pray all the stars that you may ever be content and happy ; that when you breathe roses and jessamines may fall from your mouth ; that when you comb your locks pearls and garnets may fall from them , and when you set your foot on the ground lilies and violets may spring up .
" marziella thanked the old woman , and went her way home , where her mother , having cooked a bit of supper , they paid the natural debt to the body , and thus ended the day .
and the next morning , when the sun displayed in the market - place of the celestial fields the merchandise of light which he had brought from the east , as marziella was combing her hair , she saw a shower of pearls and garnets fall from it into her lap ; whereupon calling her mother with great joy , they put them all into a basket , and luceta went to sell a great part of them to a usurer , who was a friend of hers .
meanwhile troccola came to see her sister , and finding marziella in great delight and busied with the pearls , she asked her how , when , and where she had gotten them .
but the maiden , who did not understand the ways of the world , and had perhaps never heard the proverb , " do not all you are able , eat not all you wish , spend not all you have , and tell not all you know ," related the whole affair to her aunt , who no longer cared to await her sister ' s return , for every hour seemed to her a thousand years until she got home again .
then giving a cake to her daughter , she sent her for water to the fountain , where puccia found the same old woman .
and when the old woman asked her for a little piece of cake she answered gruffly , " have i nothing to do , forsooth , but to give you cake ?
do you take me to be so foolish as to give you what belongs to me ?
look ye , charity begins at home ."
and so saying she swallowed the cake in four pieces , making the old woman ' s mouth water , who when she saw the last morsel disappear and her hopes buried with the cake , exclaimed in a rage , " begone !
and whenever you breathe may you foam at the mouth like a doctor ' s mule , may toads drop from your lips , and every time you set foot to the ground may there spring up ferns and thistles !
" puccia took the pitcher of water and returned home , where her mother was all impatience to hear what had befallen her at the fountain .
but no sooner did puccia open her lips , than a shower of toads fell from them , at the sight of which her mother added the fire of rage to the snow of envy , sending forth flame and smoke through nose and mouth . now it happened some time afterwards that ciommo , the brother of marziella , was at the court of the king of chiunzo ; and the conversation turning on the beauty of various women , he stepped forward , unasked , and said that all the handsome women might hide their heads when his sister made her appearance , who beside the beauty of her form , which made harmony on the song of a noble soul , possessed also a wonderful virtue in her hair , mouth , and feet , which was given to her by a fairy .
when the king heard these praises he told ciommo to bring his sister to the court ; adding that , if he found her such as he had represented , he would take her to wife . now ciommo thought this a chance not to be lost ; so he forthwith sent a messenger post - haste to his mother , telling her what had happened , and begging her to come instantly with her daughter , in order not to let slip the good luck .
but luceta , who was very unwell , commending the lamb to the wolf , begged her sister to have the kindness to accompany marziella to the court of chiunzo for such and such a thing .
whereupon troccola , who saw that matters were playing into her hand , promised her sister to take marziella safe and sound to her brother , and then embarked with her niece and puccia in a boat .
but when they were some way out at sea , whilst the sailors were asleep , she threw marziella into the water ; and just as the poor girl was on the point of being drowned there came a most beautiful syren , who took her in her arms and carried her off . when troccola arrived at chiunzo , ciommo , who had not seen his sister for so long a time , mistook puccia , and received her as if she were marziella , and led her instantly to the king .
but no sooner did she open her lips than toads dropped on the ground ; and when the king looked at her more closely he saw , that as she breathed hard from the fatigue of the journey , she made a lather at her mouth , which looked just like a washtub ; then looking down on the ground , he saw a meadow of stinking plants , the sight of which made him quite ill .
upon this he drove puccia and her mother away , and sent ciommo in disgrace to keep the geese of the court . then ciommo , in despair and not knowing what had happened to him , drove the geese into the fields , and letting them go their way along the seashore , he used to retire into a little straw shed , where he bewailed his lot until evening , when it was time to return home .
but whilst the geese were running about on the shore , marziella would come out of the water , and feed them with sweetmeats , and give them rose - water to drink ; so that the geese grew as big as sheep , and were so fat that they could not see out of their eyes .
and in the evening when they came into a little garden under the king ' s window , they began to sing --" pire , pire pire !
the sun and the moon are bright and clear , but she who feeds us is still more fair .
" now the king , hearing this goose - music every evening , ordered ciommo to be called , and asked him where , and how , and upon what he fed his geese .
and ciommo replied , " i give them nothing to eat but the fresh grass of the field ."
but the king , who was not satisfied with this answer , sent a trusty servant after ciommo to watch and observe where he drove the geese .
then the man followed in his footsteps , and saw him go into the little straw shed , leaving the geese to themselves ; and going their way they had no sooner come to the shore than marziella rose up out of the sea ; and i do not believe that even the mother of that blind boy who , as the poet says , " desires no other alms than tears ," ever rose from the waves so fair .
when the servant of the king saw this , he ran back to his master , beside himself with amazement , and told him the pretty spectacle he had seen upon the seashore . the curiosity of the king was increased by what the man told him , and he had a great desire to go himself and see the beautiful sight .
so the next morning , when the cock , the ringleader of the birds , excited them all to arm mankind against the night , and ciommo went with the geese to the accustomed spot , the king followed him closely ; and when the geese came to the seashore , without ciommo , who remained as usual in the little shed , the king saw marziella rise out of the water .
and after giving the geese a trayful of sweetmeats to eat and a cupful of rose - water to drink , she seated herself on a rock and began to comb her locks , from which fell handfuls of pearls and garnets ; at the same time a cloud of flowers dropped from her mouth , and under her feet was a syrian carpet of lilies and violets . when the king saw this sight , he ordered ciommo to be called , and , pointing to marziella , asked him whether he knew that beautiful maiden .
then ciommo , recognising his sister , ran to embrace her , and in the presence of the king heard from her all the treacherous conduct of troccola , and how the envy of that wicked creature had brought that fair fire of love to dwell in the waters of the sea . the joy of the king is not to be told at the acquisition of so fair a jewel ; and turning to the brother he said that he had good reason to praise marziella so much , and indeed that he found her three times more beautiful than he had described her ; he deemed her , therefore , more than worthy to be his wife if she would be content to receive the sceptre of his kingdom .
" alas , would to heaven it could be so !"
answered marziella , " and that i could serve you as the slave of your crown !
but see you not this golden chain upon my foot , by which the sorceress holds me prisoner ?
when i take too much fresh air , and tarry too long on the shore , she draws me into the waves , and thus keeps me held in rich slavery by a golden chain .
"" what way is there ," said the king , " to free you from the claws of this syren ?
"" the way ," replied marziella , " would be to cut this chain with a smooth file , and to loose me from it .
"" wait till to - morrow morning ," answered the king ; " i will then come with all that is needful , and take you home with me , where you shall be the pupil of my eye , the core of my heart , and the life of my soul ."
and then exchanging a shake of the hands as the earnest - money of their love , she went back into the water and he into the fire -- and into such a fire indeed that he had not an hour ' s rest the whole day long .
and when the black old hag of the night came forth to have a country - dance with the stars , he never closed an eye , but lay ruminating in his memory over the beauties of marziella , discoursing in thought of the marvels of her hair , the miracles of her mouth , and the wonders of her feet ; and applying the gold of her graces to the touchstone of judgment , he found that it was four - and - twenty carats fine .
but he upbraided the night for not leaving off her embroidery of the stars , and chided the sun for not arriving with the chariot of light to enrich his house with the treasure he longed for -- a mine of gold which produced pearls , a pearl - shell from which sprang flowers . but whilst he was thus at sea , thinking of her who was all the while in the sea , behold the pioneers of the sun appeared , who smooth the road along which he has to pass with the army of his rays .
then the king dressed himself , and went with ciommo to the seashore , where he found marziella ; and the king with his own hand cut the chain from the foot of the beloved object with the file which they had brought , but all the while he forged a still stronger one for his heart ; and setting her on the saddle behind him , she who was already fixed on the saddle of his heart , he set out for the royal palace , where by his command all the handsome ladies of the land were assembled , who received marziella as their mistress with all due honour .
then the king married her , and there were great festivities ; and among all the casks which were burnt for the illuminations , the king ordered that troccola should be shut up in a tub , and made to suffer for the treachery she had shown to marziella .
then sending for luceta , he gave her and ciommo enough to live upon like princes ; whilst puccia , driven out of the kingdom , wandered about as a beggar ; and , as the reward of her not having sown a little bit of cake , she had now to suffer a constant want of bread ; for it is the will of heaven that --" he who shows no pity finds none ."
