it is truly a great proverb --" rather a crooked sight than a crooked judgment "; but it is so difficult to adopt it that the judgment of few men hits the nail on the head .
on the contrary , in the sea of human affairs , the greater part are fishers in smooth waters , who catch crabs ; and he who thinks to take the most exact measure of the object at which he aims often shoots widest of the mark .
the consequence of this is that all are running pell - mell , all toiling in the dark , all thinking crookedly , all acting child ' s - play , all judging at random , and with a haphazard blow of a foolish resolution bringing upon themselves a bitter repentance ; as was the case with the king of shady - grove ; and you shall hear how it fared with him if you summon me within the circle of modesty with the bell of courtesy , and give me a little attention . it is said that there was once a king of shady - grove named milluccio , who was so devoted to the chase , that he neglected the needful affairs of his state and household to follow the track of a hare or the flight of a thrush .
and he pursued this road so far that chance one day led him to a thicket , which had formed a solid square of earth and trees to prevent the horses of the sun from breaking through .
there , upon a most beautiful marble stone , he found a raven , which had just been killed . the king , seeing the bright red blood sprinkled upon the white , white marble , heaved a deep sigh and exclaimed , " o heavens !
and cannot i have a wife as white and red as this stone , and with hair and eyebrows as black as the feathers of this raven ?"
and he stood for a while so buried in this thought that he became a counterpart to the stone , and looked like a marble image making love to the other marble .
and this unhappy fancy fixing itself in his head , as he searched for it everywhere with the lanthorn of desire , it grew in four seconds from a picktooth to a pole , from a crab - apple to an indian pumpkin , from barber ' s embers to a glass furnace , and from a dwarf to a giant ; insomuch that he thought of nothing else than the image of that object encrusted in his heart as stone to stone .
wherever he turned his eyes that form was always presented to him which he carried in his breast ; and forgetting all besides , he had nothing but that marble in his head ; in short , he became in a manner so worn away upon the stone that he was at last as thin as the edge of a penknife ; and this marble was a millstone which crushed his life , a slab of porphyry upon which the colours of his days were ground and mixed , a tinder - box which set fire to the brimstone match of his soul , a loadstone which attracted him , and lastly , a rolling - stone which could never rest . at length his brother jennariello , seeing him so pale and half - dead , said to him , " my brother , what has happened to you , that you carry grief lodged in your eyes , and despair sitting under the pale banner of your face ?
what has befallen you ?
speak -- open your heart to your brother : the smell of charcoal shut up in a chamber poisons people -- powder pent up in a mountain blows it into the air ; open your lips , therefore , and tell me what is the matter with you ; at all events be assured that i would lay down a thousand lives if i could to help you .
" then milluccio , mingling words and sighs , thanked him for his love , saying that he had no doubt of his affection , but that there was no remedy for his ill , since it sprang from a stone , where he had sown desires without hope of fruit -- a stone from which he did not expect a mushroom of content -- a stone of sisyphus , which he bore to the mountain of designs , and when it reached the top rolled over and over to the bottom .
at length , however , after a thousand entreaties , milluccio told his brother all about his love ; whereupon jennariello comforted him as much as he could , and bade him be of good cheer , and not give way to an unhappy passion ; for that he was resolved , in order to satisfy him , to go all the world over until he found a woman the counterpart of the stone . then instantly fitting out a large ship , filled with merchandise , and dressing himself like a merchant , he sailed for venice , the wonder of italy , the receptacle of virtuous men , the great book of the marvels of art and nature ; and having procured there a safe - conduct to pass to the levant , he set sail for cairo .
when he arrived there and entered the city , he saw a man who was carrying a most beautiful falcon , and jennariello at once purchased it to take to his brother , who was a sportsman .
soon afterwards he met another man with a splendid horse , which he also bought ; whereupon he went to an inn to refresh himself after the fatigues he had suffered at sea . the following morning , when the army of the star , at the command of the general of the light , strikes the tents in the camp of the sky and abandons the post , jennariello set out to wander through the city , having his eyes about him like a lynx , looking at this woman and that , to see whether by chance he could find the likeness to a stone upon a face of flesh .
and as he was wandering about at random , turning continually to this side and that , like a thief in fear of the constables , he met a beggar carrying an hospital of plasters and a mountain of rags upon his back , who said to him , " my gallant sir , what makes you so frightened ?
"" have i , forsooth , to tell you my affairs ?"
answered jennariello . "
faith i should do well to tell my reason to the constable .
"" softly , my fair youth !"
replied the beggar , " for the flesh of man is not sold by weight .
if darius had not told his troubles to a groom he would not have become king of persia .
it will be no great matter , therefore , for you to tell your affairs to a poor beggar , for there is not a twig so slender but it may serve for a toothpick .
" when jennariello heard the poor man talking sensibly and with reason , he told him the cause that had brought him to that country ; whereupon the beggar replied , " see now , my son , how necessary it is to make account of every one ; for though i am only a heap of rubbish , yet i shall be able to enrich the garden of your hopes .
now listen -- under the pretext of begging alms , i will knock at the door of the young and beautiful daughter of a magician ; then open your eyes wide , look at her , contemplate her , regard her , measure her from head to foot , for you will find the image of her whom your brother desires ."
so saying , he knocked at the door of a house close by , and liviella opening it threw him a piece of bread . as soon as jennariello saw her , she seemed to him built after the model which milluccio had given him ; then he gave a good alms to the beggar and sent him away , and going to the inn he dressed himself like a pedlar , carrying in two caskets all the wealth of the world .
and thus he walked up and down before liviella ' s house crying his wares , until at length she called him , and took a view of the beautiful net - caps , hoods , ribands , gauze , edgings , lace , handkerchiefs , collars , needles , cups of rouge , and head - gear fit for a queen , which he carried .
and when she had examined all the things again and again , she told him to show her something else ; and jennariello answered , " my lady , in these caskets i have only cheap and paltry wares ; but if you will deign to come to my ship , i will show you things of the other world , for i have there a host of beautiful goods worthy of any great lord .
" liviella , who was full of curiosity , not to belie the nature of her sex , replied , " if my father indeed were not out he would have given me some money .
"" nay , you can come all the better if he is out ," replied jennariello , " for perhaps he might not allow you the pleasure ; and i ' ll promise to show you such splendid things as will make you rave -- such necklaces and earrings , such bracelets and sashes , such workmanship in paper -- in short i will perfectly astound you .
" when liviella heard all this display of finery she called a gossip of hers to accompany her , and went to the ship .
but no sooner had she embarked than jennariello , whilst keeping her enchanted with the sight of all the beautiful things he had brought , craftily ordered the anchor to be weighed and the sails to be set , so that before liviella raised her eyes from the wares and saw that she had left the land , they had already gone many miles .
when at length she perceived the trick , she began to act olympia the reverse way ; for whereas olympia bewailed being left upon a rock , liviella lamented leaving the rocks .
but when jennariello told her who he was , whither he was carrying her , and the good fortune that awaited her , and pictured to her , moreover , milluccio ' s beauty , his valour , his virtues , and lastly the love with which he would receive her , he succeeded in pacifying her , and she even prayed the wind to bear her quickly to see the colouring of thedesign which jennariello had drawn . as they were sailing merrily along they heard the waves grumbling beneath the ship ; and although they spoke in an undertone , the captain of the ship , who understood in an instant what it meant , cried out , " all hands aboard !
for here comes a storm , and heaven save us !"
no sooner had he spoken these words than there came the testimony of a whistling of the wind ; and behold the sky was overcast with clouds , and the sea was covered with white - crested waves .
and whilst the waves on either side of the ship , curious to know what the others were about , leaped uninvited to the nuptials upon the deck , one man baled them with a bowl into a tub , another drove them off with a pump ; and whilst every sailor was hard at work -- as it concerned his own safety -- one minding the rudder , another hauling the foresail , another the mainsheet , jennariello ran up to the topmast , to see with a telescope if he could discover any land where they might cast anchor .
and lo !
whilst he was measuring a hundred miles of distance with two feet of telescope , he saw a dove and its mate come flying up and alight upon the sail - yard .
then the male bird said , " rucche , rucche !"
and his mate answered , " what ' s the matter , husband , that you are lamenting so ?"
" this poor prince ," replied the other , " has bought a falcon , which as soon as it shall be in his brother ' s hands will pick out his eyes ; but if he does not take it to him , or if he warns him of the danger , he will turn to marble ."
and thereupon he began again to cry , " rucche , rucche !"
and his mate said to him , " what , still lamenting !
is there anything new ?"
" ay , indeed ," answered the male dove , " he has also bought a horse , and the first time his brother rides him the horse will break his neck ; but if he does not take it to him , or if he warns him of the danger , he will turn to marble ."
" rucche , rucche !"
he cried again .
" alas , with all these rucche , rucche ," said the female dove , " what ' s the matter now ?"
and her mate said , " this man is taking a beautiful wife to his brother ; but the first night , as soon as they go to sleep , they will both be devoured by a frightful dragon ; yet if he does not take her to him , or if he warns him of the danger , he will turn to marble .
" as he spoke , the tempest ceased , and the rage of the sea and the fury of the wind subsided .
but a far greater tempest arose in jennariello ' s breast , from what he had heard , and more than twenty times he was on the point of throwing all the things into the sea , in order not to carry to his brother the cause of his ruin .
but on the other hand he thought of himself , and reflected that charity begins at home ; and fearing that , if he did not carry these things to his brother , or if he warned him of the danger , he should turn to marble , he resolved to look rather to the fact than to the possibility , since the shirt was closer to him than the jacket . when he arrived at shady - grove , he found his brother on the shore , awaiting with great joy the return of the ship , which he had seen at a distance .
and when he saw that it bore her whom he carried in his heart , and confronting one face with the other perceived that there was not the difference of a hair , his joy was so great that he was almost weighed down under the excessive burden of delight .
then embracing his brother fervently , he said to him , " what falcon is that you are carrying on your fist ?"
and jennariello answered , " i have bought it on purpose to give to you ."
" i see clearly that you love me ," replied milluccio , " since you go about seeking to give me pleasure .
truly , if you had brought me a costly treasure , it could not have given me greater delight than this falcon ."
and just as he was going to take it in his hand , jennariello quickly drew a large knife which he carried at his side and cut off its head .
at this deed the king stood aghast , and thought his brother mad to have done such a stupid act ; but not to interrupt the joy at his arrival , he remained silent .
presently , however , he saw the horse , and on asking his brother whose it was , heard that it was his own .
then he felt a great desire to ride him , and just as he was ordering the stirrup to beheld , jennariello quickly cut off the horse ' s legs with his knife .
thereat the king waxed wrath , for his brother seemed to have done it on purpose to vex him , and his choler began to rise .
however , he did not think it a right time to show resentment , lest he should poison the pleasure of the bride at first sight , whom he could never gaze upon enough . when they arrived at the royal palace , he invited all the lords and ladies of the city to a grand feast , at which the hall seemed just like a riding - school full of horses , curveting and prancing , with a number of foals in the form of women .
but when the ball was ended , and a great banquet had been despatched , they all retired to rest . jennariello , who thought of nothing else than to save his brother ' s life , hid himself behind the bed of the bridal pair ; and as he stood watching to see the dragon come , behold at midnight a fierce dragon entered the chamber , who sent forth flames from his eyes and smoke from his mouth , and who , from the terror he carried in his look , would have been a good agent to sell all the antidotes to fear in the apothecaries ' shops .
as soon as jennariello saw the monster , he began to lay about him right and left with a damascus blade which he had hidden under his cloak ; and he struck one blow so furiously that it cut in halves a post of the king ' s bed , at which noise the king awoke , and the dragon disappeared . when milluccio saw the sword in his brother ' s hand , and the bedpost cut in two , he set up a loud cry , " help here !
hola !
help !
this traitor of a brother is come to kill me !"
whereupon , hearing the noise , a number of servants who slept in the antechamber came running up , and the king ordered jennariello to be bound , and sent him the same hour to prison . the next morning , as soon as the sun opened his bank to deliver the deposit of light to the creditor of the day , the king summoned the council ; and when he told them what had passed , confirming the wicked intention shown in killing the falcon and the horse on purpose to vex him , they judged that jennariello deserved to die .
the prayers of liviella were all unavailing to soften the heart of the king , who said , " you do not love me , wife , for you have more regard for your brother - in - law than for my life .
you have seen with your own eyes this dog of an assassin come with a sword that would cut a hair in the air to kill me ; and if the bedpost ( the column of my life ) had not protected me , you would at this moment have been a widow ."
so saying , he gave orders that justice should take its course . when jennariello heard this sentence , and saw himself so ill - rewarded for doing good , he knew not what to think or to do .
if he said nothing , bad ; if he spoke , worse ; and whatever he should do was a fall from the tree into the wolf ' s mouth .
if he remained silent , he should lose his head under an axe ; if he spoke , he should end his days in a stone .
at length , after various resolutions , he made up his mind to disclose the matter to his brother ; and since he must die at all events , he thought it better to tell his brother the truth , and to end his days with the title of an innocent man , than to keep the truth to himself and be sent out of the world as a traitor .
so sending word to the king that he had something to say of importance to his state , he was led into his presence , where he first made a long preamble of the love he had always borne him ; then he went on to tell of the deception he had practiced on liviella in order to give him pleasure ; and then what he had heard from the doves about the falcon , and how , to avoid being turned to marble , he had brought it him , and without revealing the secret had killed it in order not to see him without eyes . as he spoke , he felt his legs stiffen and turn to marble .
and when he went on to relate the affair of the horse in the same manner , he became visibly stone up to the waist , stiffening miserably -- a thing which at another time he would have paid in ready money , but which now his heart wept at .
at last , when he came to the affair of the dragon , he stood like a statue in the middle of the hall , stone from head to foot .
when the king saw this , reproaching himself for the error he had committed , and the rash sentence he had passed upon so good and loving a brother , he mourned him more than a year , and every time he thought of him he shed a river of tears . meanwhile liviella gave birth to two sons , who were two of the most beautiful creatures in the world .
and after a few months , when the queen was gone into the country for pleasure , and the father and his two little boys chanced to be standing in the middle of the hall , gazing with tearful eyes on the statue -- the memorial of his folly , which had taken from him the flower of men -- behold a stately and venerable old man entered , whose long hair fell upon his shoulders and whose beard covered his breast .
and making a reverence to the king , the old man said to him , " what would your majesty give to have this noble brother return to his former state ?"
and the king answered , " i would give my kingdom ."
" nay ," replied the old man , " this is not a thing that requires payment in wealth ; but being an affair of life , it must be paid for with as much again of life .
" then the king , partly out of the love he bore jennariello , and partly from hearing himself reproached with the injury he had done him , answered , " believe me , my good sir , i would give my own life for his life ; and provided that he came out of the stone , i should be content to be enclosed in a stone .
" hearing this the old man said , " without putting your life to the risk -- since it takes so long to rear a man -- the blood of these , your two little boys , smeared upon the marble , would suffice to make him instantly come to life ."
then the king replied , " children i may have again , but i have a brother , and another i can never more hop to see ."
so saying , he made a pitiable sacrifice of two little innocent kids before an idol of stone , and besmearing the statue with their blood , it instantly became alive ; whereupon the king embraced his brother , and their joy is not to be told .
then they had these poor little creatures put into a coffin , in order to give them burial with all due honour .
but just at that instant the queen returned home , and the king , bidding his brother hide himself , said to his wife , " what would you give , my heart , to have my brother restored to life ?"
" i would give this whole kingdom ," replied liviella .
and the king answered , " would you give the blood of your children ?"
" nay , not that , indeed ," replied the queen ; " for i could not be so cruel as to tear out with my own hands the apple of my eyes ."
" alas !"
said the king , " in order to see a brother alive , i have killed my own children !
for this was the price of jennariello ' s life !
" so saying , he showed the queen the little boys in the coffin ; and when she saw this sad spectacle , she cried aloud like one mad , saying , " o my children !
you props of my life , joys of my heart , fountains of my blood !
who has painted red the windows of the sun ?
who has without a doctor ' s licence bled the chief vein of my life ?
alas , my children , my children !
my hope now taken from me , my light now darkened , my joy now poisoned , my support now lost !
you are stabbed by the sword , i am pierced by grief ; you are drowned in blood , i in tears .
alas that , to give life to an uncle , you have slain your mother !
for i am no longer able to weave the thread of my days without you , the fair counterpoises of the loom of my unhappy life .
the organ of my voice must be silent , now that its bellows are taken away .
o children , children !
why do ye not give answer to your mother , who once gave you the blood in your veins , and now weeps it for you from her eyes ?
but since fate shows me the fountain of my happiness dried up , i will no longer live the sport of fortune in the world , but will go at once to find you again !
" so saying , she ran to a window to throw herself out ; but just at that instant her father entered by the same window in a cloud , and called to her , " stop , liviella !
i have now accomplished what i intended , and killed three birds with one stone .
i have revenged myself on jennariello , who came to my house to rob me of my daughter , by making him stand all these months like a marble statue in a block of stone .
i have punished you for your ill - conduct in going away in a ship without my permission , by showing you your two children , your two jewels , killed by their own father .
and i have punished the king for the caprice he took into his head , by making him first the judge of his brother , and afterwards the executioner of his children .
but as i have wished only to shear and not to flay you , i desire now that all the poison may turn into sweetmeats for you .
therefore , go , take again your children and my grandchildren , who are more beautiful than ever .
and you , milluccio , embrace me .
i receive you as my son - in - law and as my son .
and i pardon jennariello his offence , having done all that he did out of love to so excellent a brother .
" and as he spoke , the little children came , and the grandfather was never satisfied with embracing and kissing them ; and in the midst of the rejoicings jennariello entered , as a third sharer in them , who , after suffering so many storms of fate , was now swimming in macaroni broth .
but notwithstanding all the after pleasures that he enjoyed in life , his past dangers never went from his mind ; and he was always thinking on the error his brother had committed , and how careful a man ought to be not to fall into the ditch , since --" all human judgment is false and perverse ."
