it is a saying worthy to be written in letters as big as those on a monument , that silence never harmed any one : and let it not be imagined that those slanderers who never speak well of others , but are always cutting and stinging , and pinching and biting , ever gain anything by their malice ; for when the bags come to be shaken out , it has always been seen , and is so still , that whilst a good word gains love and profit , slander brings enmity and ruin ; and when you shall have heard how this happens , you will say i speak with reason . once upon a time there were two brothers -- cianne , who was as rich as a lord , and lise , who had barely enough to live upon : but poor as one was in fortune , so pitiful was the other in mind , for he would not have given his brother a farthing were it to save his life ; so that poor lise in despair left his country , and set out to wander over the world .
and he wandered on and on , till one wet and cold evening he came to an inn , where he found twelve youths seated around a fire , who , when they saw poor lise benumbed with cold , partly from the severe season and partly from his ragged clothes , invited him to sit down by the fire . lise accepted the invitation , for he needed it greatly , and began to warm himself .
and as he was warming himself , one of the young men whose face was such a picture of moroseness as to make you die of fright , said to him , " what think you , countryman , of this weather ?
"" what do i think of it ?"
replied lise ; " i think that all the months of the year perform their duty ; but we , who know not what we would have , wish to give laws to heaven ; and wanting to have things our own way , we do not fish deeply enough to the bottom , to find out whether what comes into our fancy be good or evil , useful or hurtful .
in winter , when it rains , we want the sun in leo , and in the month of august the clouds to discharge themselves ; not reflecting , that were this the case , the seasons would be turned topsy - turvy , the seed sown would be lost , the crops would be destroyed , the bodies of men would faint away , and nature would go head over heels .
therefore let us leave heaven to its own course ; for it has made the tree to mitigate with its wood the severity of winter , and with its leaves the heat of summer .
"" you speak like samson !"
replied the youth ; " but you cannot deny that this month of march , in which we now are , is very impertinent to send all this frost and rain , snow and hail , wind and storm , these fogs and tempests and other troubles , that make one ' s life a burden .
"" you tell only the ill of this poor month ," replied lisa , " but do not speak of the benefits it yields us ; for , by bringing forward the spring , it commences the production of things , and is alone the cause that the sun proves the happiness of the present time , by leading him into the house of the ram .
" the youth was greatly pleased at what lise said , for he was in truth no other than the month of march itself , who had arrived at that inn with his eleven brothers ; and to reward lise ' s goodness , who had not even found anything ill to say of a month so sad that the shepherds do not like to mention it , he gave him a beautiful little casket , saying , " take this , and if you want anything , only ask for it , and when you open this box you will see it before you ."
lise thanked the youth , with many expressions of respect , and laying the little box under his head by way of a pillow , he went to sleep . as soon , however , as the sun , with the pencil of his rays , had retouched the dark shadows of night , lise took leave of the youths and set out on his way .
but he had hardly proceeded fifty steps from the inn , when , opening the casket , he said , " ah , my friend , i wish i had a litter lined with cloth , and with a little fire inside , that i might travel warm and comfortable through the snow !"
no sooner had he uttered the words than there appeared a litter , with bearers , who , lifting him up , placed him in it ; whereupon he told them to carry him home . when the hour was come to set the jaws to work lise opened the little box and said , " i wish for something to eat ."
and instantly there appeared a profusion of the choicest food , and there was such a banquet that ten crowned kings might have feasted on it . one evening , having come to a wood which did not give admittance to the sun because he came from suspected places , lise opened the little casket , and said , " i should like to rest to - night on this beautiful spot , where the river is making harmony upon the stones as accompaniment to the song of the cool breezes ."
and instantly there appeared , under an oilcloth tent , a couch of fine scarlet , with down mattresses , covered with a spanish counterpane and sheets as light as a feather .
then he asked for something to eat , and in a trice there was set out a sideboard covered with silver and gold fit for a prince , and under another tent a table was spread with viands , the savoury smell of which extended a hundred miles . when he had eaten enough , he laid himself down to sleep ; and as soon as the cock , who is the spy of the sun , announced to his master that the shades of night were worn and wearied , and it was now time for him , like a skilful general , to fall upon their rear and make a slaughter of them , lise opened his little box and said , " i wish to have a handsome dress , for to - day i shall see my brother , and i should like to make his mouth water ."
no sooner said than done : immediately a princely dress of the richest black velvet appeared , with edgings of red camlet and a lining of yellow cloth embroidered all over , which looked like a field of flowers .
so dressing himself , lise got into the litter and soon reached his brother ' s house . when cianne saw his brother arrive , with all this splendour and luxury , he wished to know what good fortune had befallen him .
then lise told him of the youths whom he had met in the inn , and of the present they had made him ; but he kept to himself his conversation with the youths . cianne was now all impatience to get away from his brother , and told him to go and rest himself , as he was no doubt tired ; then he started post - haste , and soon arrived at the inn , where , finding the same youths , he fell into chat with them .
and when the youth asked him the same question , what he thought of that month of march , cianne , making a big mouth , said , " confound the miserable month !
the enemy of shepherds , which stirs up all the ill - humours and brings sickness to our bodies .
a month of which , whenever we would announce ruin to a man , we say , go , march has shaved you !'
a month of which , when you want to call a man presumptuous , you say , what cares march ?'
a month in short so hateful , that it would be the best fortune for the world , the greatest blessing to the earth , the greatest gain to men , were it excluded from the band of brothers .
" march , who heard himself thus slandered , suppressed his anger till the morning , intending then to reward cianne for his calumny ; and when cianne wished to depart , he gave him a fine whip , saying to him , " whenever you wish for anything , only say , whip , give me a hundred !'
and you shall see pearls strung upon a rush .
" cianne , thanking the youth , went his way in great haste , not wishing to make trial of the whip until he reached home .
but hardly had he set foot in the house , when he went into a secret chamber , intending to hide the money which he expected to receive from the whip .
then he said , " whip , give me a hundred !"
and thereupon the whip gave him more than he looked for , making a score on his legs and face like a musical composer , so that lise , hearing his cries , came running to the spot ; and when he saw that the whip , like a runaway horse , could not stop itself , he opened the little box and brought it to a standstill .
then he asked cianne what had happened to him , and upon hearing his story , he told him he had no one to blame but himself ; for like a blockhead he alone had caused his own misfortune , acting like the camel , that wanted to have horns and lost its ears ; but he bade him mind another time and keep a bridle on his tongue , which was the key that had opened to him the storehouse of misfortune ; for if he had spoken well of the youths , he would perhaps have had the same good fortune , especially as to speak well of any one is a merchandise that costs nothing , and usually brings profit that is not expected .
in conclusion lise comforted him , bidding him not seek more wealth than heaven had give him , for his little casket would suffice to fill the houses of thirty misers , and cianne should be master of all he possessed , since to the generous man heaven is treasurer ; and he added that , although another brother might have borne cianne ill - will for the cruelty with which he had treated him in his poverty , yet he reflected that his avarice had been a favourable wind which had brought him to this port , and therefore wished to show himself grateful for the benefit . when cianne heard these things , he begged his brother ' s pardon for his past unkindness , and entering into partnership they enjoyed together their good fortune , and from that time forward cianne spoke well of everything , however bad it might be ; for --" the dog that was scalaed with hot water , for ever dreads that which is cold ."
