it has always been more difficult for a man to keep than to get ; for in the one case fortune aids , which often assists injustice , but in the other case sense is required .
therefore we frequently find a person deficient in cleverness rise to wealth , and then , from want of sense , roll over heels to the bottom ; as you will see clearly from the story i am going to tell you , if you are quick of understanding . a merchant once had an only daughter , whom he wished greatly to see married ; but as often as he struck this note , he found her a hundred miles off from the desired pitch , for the foolish girl would never consent to marry , and the father was in consequence the most unhappy and miserable man in the world .
now it happened one day that he was going to a fair ; so he asked his daughter , who was named betta , what she would like him to bring her on his return .
and she said , " papa , if you love me , bring me half a hundredweight of palermo sugar , and as much again of sweet almonds , with four to six bottles of scented water , and a little musk and amber , also forty pearls , two sapphires , a few garnets and rubies , with some gold thread , and above all a trough and a little silver trowel ."
her father wondered at this extravagant demand , nevertheless he would not refuse his daughter ; so he went to the fair , and on his return brought her all that she had requested . as soon as betta received these things , she shut herself up in a chamber , and began to make a great quantity of paste of almonds and sugar , mixed with rosewater and perfumes , and set to work to form a most beautiful youth , making his hair of gold thread , his eyes of sapphires , his teeth of pearls , his lips of rubies ; and she gave him such grace that speech alone was wanting to him .
when she had done all this , having heard say that at the prayers of a certain king of cyprus a statue had once come to life , she prayed to the goddess of love so long that at last the statue began to open its eyes ; and increasing her prayers , it began to breathe ; and after breathing , words came out ; and at last , disengaging all its limbs , it began to walk . with a joy far greater than if she had gained a kingdom , betta embraced and kissed the youth , and taking him by the hand , she led him before her father and said , " my lord and father , you have always told me that you wished to see me married , and in order to please you i have now chosen a husband after my own heart ."
when her father saw the handsome youth come out of his daughter ' s room , whom he had not seen enter it , he stood amazed , and at the sight of such beauty , which folks would have paid a halfpenny a head to gaze at , he consented that the marriage should take place .
so a great feast was made , at which , among the other ladies present , there appeared a great unknown queen , who , seeing the beauty of pintosmalto ( for that was the name betta gave him ), fell desperately in love with him .
now pintosmalto , who had only opened his eyes on the wickedness of the world three hours before , and was as innocent as a babe , accompanied the strangers who had come to celebrate his nuptials to the stairs , as his bride had told him ; and when he did the same with this queen , she took him by the hand and led him quietly to her coach , drawn by six horses , which stood in the courtyard ; then taking him into it , she ordered the coachman to drive off and away to her country . after betta had waited a while in vain expecting pintosmalto to return , she sent down into the courtyard to see whether he were speaking with any one there ; then she sent up to the roof to see if he had gone to take fresh air ; but finding him nowhere , she directly imagined that , on account of his great beauty , he had been stolen from her .
so she ordered the usual proclamations to be made ; but at last , as no tidings of him were brought , she formed the resolution to go all the world over in search of him , and dressing herself as a poor girl , she set out on her way .
after some months she came to the house of a good old woman , who received her with great kindness ; and when she had heard betta ' s misfortune , she took compassion on her , and taught her three sayings .
the first was , " tricche varlacche , the house rains !"
the second , " anola tranola , the fountain plays !
"; the third , " scatola matola , the sun shines !"
-- telling her to repeat these words whenever she was in trouble , and they would be of good service to her . betta wondered greatly at this present of chaff , nevertheless she said to herself , " he who blows into your mouth does not wish to see you dead , and the plant that strikes root does not wither ; everything has its use ; who knows what good fortune may be contained in these words ?"
so saying , she thanked the old woman , and set out upon her way .
and after a long journey she came to a beautiful city called round mount , where she went straight to the royal palace , and begged for the love of heaven a little shelter in the stable .
so the ladies of the court ordered a small room to be given her on the stairs ; and while poor betta was sitting there she saw pintosmalto pass by , whereat her joy was so great that she was on the point of slipping down from the tree of life .
but seeing the trouble she was in , betta wished to make proof of the first saying which the old woman had told her ; and no sooner had she repeated the words , " tricche varlacche , the house rains !"
than instantly there appeared before her a beautiful little coach of gold set all over with jewels , which ran about the chamber of itself and was a wonder to behold . when the ladies of the court saw this sight they went and told the queen , who without loss of time ran to betta ' s chamber ; and when she saw the beautiful little coach , she asked whether she would sell it , and offered to give whatever she might demand .
but betta replied that , although she was poor she would not sell it for all the gold in the world , but if the queen wished for the little coach , she must allow her to pass one night at the door of pintosmalto ' s chamber . the queen was amazed at the folly of the poor girl , who although she was all in rags would nevertheless give up such riches for a mere whim ; however , she resolved to take the good mouthful offered her , and , by giving pintosmalto a sleeping - draught , to satisfy the poor girl but pay her in bad coin . as soon as the night was come , when the stars in the sky and the glowworms on the earth were to pass in review , the queen gave a sleeping - draught to pintosmalto , who did everything he was told , and sent him to bed .
and no sooner had he thrown himself on the mattress than he fell as sound asleep as a dormouse .
poor betta , who thought that night to relate all her past troubles , seeing now that she had no audience , fell to lamenting beyond measure , blaming herself for all that she had done for his sake ; and the unhappy girl never closed her mouth , nor did the sleeping pintosmalto ever open his eyes until the sun appeared with the aqua regia of his rays to separate the shades from the light , when the queen came down , and taking pintosmalto by the hand , said to betta , " now be content .
"" may you have such content all the days of your life !"
replied betta in an undertone ; " for i have passed so bad a night that i shall not soon forget it .
" the poor girl , however , could not resist her longing , and resolved to make trial of the second saying ; so she repeated the words , " anola tranola , the fountain plays !"
and instantly there appeared a golden cage , with a beautiful bird made of precious stones and gold , which sang like a nightingale .
when the ladies saw this they went and told it to the queen , who wished to see the bird ; then she asked the same question as about the little coach , and betta made the same reply as before .
whereupon the queen , who perceived , as she thought , what a silly creature betta was , promised to grant her request , and took the cage with the bird .
and as soon as night came she gave pintosmalto a sleeping - draught as before , and sent him to bed .
when betta saw that he slept like a dead person , she began again to wail and lament , saying things that would have moved a flintstone to compassion ; and thus she passed another night , full of trouble , weeping and wailing and tearing her hair .
but as soon as it was day the queen came to fetch her captive , and left poor betta in grief and sorrow , and biting her hands with vexation at the trick that had been played her . in the morning when pintosmalto went to a garden outside the city gate to pluck some figs , he met a cobbler , who lived in a room close to where betta lay and had not lost a word of all she had said .
then he told pintosmalto of the weeping , lamentation , and crying of the unhappy beggar - girl ; and when pintosmalto , who already began to get a little more sense , heard this , he guessed how matters stood , and resolved that , if the same thing happened again , he would not drink what the queen gave him . betta now wished to make the third trial , so she said the words , " scatola matola , the sun shines !"
and instantly there appeared a quantity of stuffs of silk and gold , and embroidered scarfs , with a golden cup ; in short , the queen herself could not have brought together so many beautiful ornaments .
when the ladies saw these things they told their mistress , who endeavoured to obtain them as she had done the others ; but betta replied as before , that if the queen wished to have them she must let her spend the night at the door of the chamber .
then the queen said to herself , " what can i lose by satisfying this silly girl , in order to get from her these beautiful things ?"
so taking all the treasures which betta offered her , as soon as night appeared , the instrument for the debt contracted with sleep and repose being liquidated , she gave the sleeping - draught to pintosmalto ; but this time he did not swallow it , and making an excuse to leave the room , he spat it out again , and then went to bed . betta now began the same tune again , saying how she had kneaded him with her own hands of sugar and almonds , how she had made his hair of gold , and his eyes and mouth of pearls and precious stones , and how he was indebted to her for his life , which the gods had granted to her prayers , and lastly how he had been stolen from her , and she had gone seeking him with such toil and trouble .
then she went on to tell him how she had watched two nights at the door of his room , and for leave to do so had given up two treasures , and yet had not been able to hear a single word from him , so that this was the last night of her hopes and the conclusion of her life . when pintosmalto , who had remained awake , heard these words , and called to mind as a dream all that had passed , he rose and embraced her ; and as night had just come forth with her black mask to direct the dance of the stars , he went very quietly into the chamber of the queen , who was in a deep sleep , and took from her all the things that she had taken from betta , and all the jewels and money which were in a desk , to repay himself for his past troubles .
then returning to his wife , they set off that very hour , and travelled on and on until they arrived at her father ' s house , where they found him alive and well ; and from the joy of seeing his daughter again he became like a boy of fifteen years .
but when the queen found neither pintosmalto , nor beggar - girl , nor jewels , she tore her hair and rent her clothes , and called to mind the saying --" he who cheats must not complain if he be cheated ."
