a person who is over - curious , and wants to know more than he ought , always carries the match in his hand to set fire to the powder - room of his own fortunes ; and he who pries into others ' affairs is frequently a loser in his own ; for generally he who digs holes to search for treasures , comes to a ditch into which he himself falls -- as happened to the daughter of a gardener in the following manner . there was once a gardener who was so very very poor that , however hard he worked , he could not manage to get bread for his family .
so he gave three little pigs to his three daughters , that they might rear them , and thus get something for a little dowry .
then pascuzza and cice , who were the eldest , drove their little pigs to feed in a beautiful meadow ; but they would not let parmetella , who was the youngest daughter , go with them , and sent her away , telling her to go and feed her pig somewhere else .
so parmetella drove her little animal into a wood , where the shades were holding out against the assaults of the sun ; and coming to a pasture -- in the middle of which flowed a fountain , that , like the hostess of an inn where cold water is sold , was inviting the passers - by with its silver tongue -- she found a certain tree with golden leaves .
then plucking one of them , she took it to her father , who with great joy sold it for more than twenty ducats , which served to stop up a hole in his affairs .
and when he asked parmetella where she had found it , she said , " take it , sir , and ask no questions , unless you would spoil your good fortune ."
the next day she returned and did the same ; and she went on plucking the leaves from the tree until it was entirely stript , as if it had been plundered by the winds of autumn .
then she perceived that the tree had a large golden root , which she could not pull up with her hands ; so she went home , and fetching an axe set to work to lay bare the root around the foot of the tree ; and raising the trunk as well as she could , she found under it a beautiful porphyry staircase . parmetella , who was curious beyond measure , went down the stairs , and walking through a large and deep cavern , she came to a beautiful plain , on which was a splendid palace , where only gold and silver were trodden underfoot , and pearls and precious stones everywhere met the eye .
and as parmetella stood wondering at all these splendid things , not seeing any person moving among so many beautiful fixtures , she went into a chamber , in which were a number of pictures ; and on them were seen painted various beautiful things -- especially the ignorance of man esteemed wise , the injustice of him who held the scales , the injuries avenged by heaven -- things truly to amaze one .
and in the same chamber also was a splendid table , set out with things to eat and to drink . seeing no one , parmetella , who was very hungry , sat down at a table to eat like a fine count ; but whilst she was in the midst of the feast , behold a handsome slave entered , who said , " stay !
do not go away , for i will have you for my wife , and will make you the happiest woman in the world ."
in spite of her fear , parmetella took heart at this good offer , and consenting to what the slave proposed , a coach of diamonds was instantly given her , drawn by four golden steeds , with wings of emeralds and rubies , who carried her flying through the air to take an airing ; and a number of apes , clad in cloth of gold , were given to attend on her person , who forthwith arrayed her from head to foot , and adorned her so that she looked just like a queen . when night was come , and the sun -- desiring to sleep on the banks of the river of india untroubled by gnats -- had put out the light , the slave said to parmetella , " my dear , now go to rest in this bed ; but remember first to put out the candle , and mind what i say , or ill will betide you ."
then parmetella did as he told her ; but no sooner had she closed her eyes than the blackamoor , changing to a handsome youth , lay down to sleep .
but the next morning , ere the dawn went forth to seek fresh eggs in the fields of the sky the youth arose and took his other form again , leaving parmetella full of wonder and curiosity . and again the following night , when parmetella went to rest , she put out the candle as she had done the night before , and the youth came as usual and lay down to sleep .
but no sooner had he shut his eyes than parmetella arose , took a steel which she had provided , and lighting the tinder applied a match ; then taking the candle , she raised the coverlet , and beheld the ebony turned to ivory , and the coal to chalk .
and whilst she stood gazing with open mouth , and contemplating the most beautiful pencilling that nature had ever given upon the canvas of wonder , the youth awoke , and began to reproach parmetella , saying , " ah , woe is me !
for your prying curiosity i have to suffer another seven years this accursed punishment .
but begone !
run , scamper off !
take yourself out of my sight !
you know not what good fortune you lose ."
so saying , he vanished like quicksilver . the poor girl left the palace , cold and stiff with affright , and with her head bowed to the ground .
and when she had come out of the cavern she met a fairy , who said to her , " my child , how my heart grieves at your misfortune !
unhappy girl , you are going to the slaughter - house , where you will pass over the bridge no wider than a hair .
therefore , to provide against your peril , take these seven spindles with these seven figs , and a little jar of honey , and these seven pairs of iron shoes , and walk on and on without stopping , until they are worn out ; then you will see seven women standing upon a balcony of a house , and spinning from above down to the ground , with the thread wound upon the bone of a dead person .
remain quite still and hidden , and when the thread comes down , take out the bone and put in its place a spindle besmeared with honey , with a fig in the place of the little button .
then as soon as the women draw up the spindles and taste the honey , they will say -- he who has made my spindle sweet , shall in return with good fortune meet !
' and after repeating these words , they will say , one after another , o you who brought us these sweet things appear !'
then you must answer , nay , for you will eat me .'
and they will say , we swear by our spoon that we will not eat you !'
but do not stir ; and they will continue , we swear by our spit that we will not eat you !'
but stand firm , as if rooted to the spot ; and they will say , we swear by our broom that we will not eat you !'
still do not believe them ; and when they say , we swear by our pail that we will not eat you !'
shut your mouth , and say not a word , or it will cost you your life .
at last they will say , we swear by thunder - and - lightning that we will not eat you !'
then take courage and mount up , for they will do you no harm .
" when parmetella heard this , she set off and walked over hill and dale , until at the end of seven years the iron shoes were worn out ; and coming to a large house , with a projecting balcony , she saw the seven women spinning .
so she did as the fairy had advised her ; and after a thousand wiles and allurements , they swore by thunder - and - lightning , whereupon she showed herself and mounted up .
then they all seven said to her , " traitress , you are the cause that our brother has lived twice seven long years in the cavern , far away from us , in the form of a blackamoor !
but never mind ; although you have been clever enough to stop our throat with the oath , you shall on the first opportunity pay off both the old and the new reckoning .
but now hear what you must do .
hide yourself behind this trough , and when our mother comes , who would swallow you down at once , rise up and seize her behind her back ; hold her fast , and do not let her go until she swears by thunder - and - lightning not to harm you .
" parmetella did as she was bid , and after the ogress had sworn by the fire - shovel , by the spinning - wheel , by the reel , by the sideboard , and by the peg , at last she swore by thunder - and - lightning ; whereupon parmetella let go her hold , and showed herself to the ogress , who said , " you have caught me this time ; but take care , traitress !
for , at the first shower , i ' ll send you to the lava .
" one day the ogress , who was on the look - out for an opportunity to devour parmetella , took twelve sacks of various seeds -- peas , chick - peas , lentils , vetches , kidney - beans , beans , and lupins -- and mixed them all together ; then she said to her , " traitress , take these seeds and sort them all , so that each kind may be separated from the rest ; and if they are not all sorted by this evening , i ' ll swallow you like a penny tart .
" poor parmetella sat down beside the sacks , weeping , and said , " o mother , mother , how will this golden root prove a root of woes to me !
now is my misery completed ; by seeing a black face turned white , all has become black before my eyes .
alas !
i am ruined and undone -- there is no help for it .
i already seem as if i were in the throat of that horrid ogress ; there is no one to help me , there is no one to advise me , there is no one to comfort me !
" as she was lamenting thus , lo !
thunder - and - lightning appeared like a flash , for the banishment laid upon him by the spell had just ended .
although he was angry with parmetella , yet his blood could not turn to water , and seeing her grieving thus he said to her , " traitress , what makes you weep so ?"
then she told him of his mother ' s ill - treatment of her , and her wish to make an end of her , and eat her up .
but thunder - and - lightning replied , " calm yourself and take heart , for it shall not be as she said ."
and instantly scattering all the seeds on the ground he made a deluge of ants spring up , who forthwith set to work to heap up all the seeds separately , each kind by itself , and parmetella filled the sacks with them . when the ogress came home and found the task done , she was almost in despair , and cried , " that dog thunder - and - lightning has played me this trick ; but you shall not escape thus !
so take these pieces of bed - tick , which are enough for twelve mattresses , and mind that by this evening they are filled with feathers , or else i will make mincemeat of you .
" the poor girl took the bed - ticks , and sitting down upon the ground began to weep and lament bitterly , making two fountains of her eyes .
but presently thunder - and - lightning appeared , and said to her , " do not weep , traitress ,-- leave it to me , and i will bring you to port ; so let down your hair , spread the bed - ticks upon the ground , and fall to weeping and wailing , and crying out that the king of the birds is dead , then you ' ll see what will happen .
" parmetella did as she was told , and behold a cloud of birds suddenly appeared that darkened the air ; and flapping their wings they let fall their feathers by basketfuls , so that in less than an hour the mattresses were all filled .
when the ogress came home and saw the task done , she swelled up with rage till she almost burst , saying , " thunder - and - lightning is determined to plague me , but may i be dragged at an ape ' s tail if i let her escape !"
then she said to parmetella , " run quickly to my sister ' s house , and tell her to send me the musical instruments ; for i have resolved that thunder - and - lightning shall marry , and we will make a feast fit for a king ."
at the same time she sent to bid her sister , when the poor girl came to ask for the instruments , instantly to kill and cook her , and she would come and partake of the feast . parmetella , hearing herself ordered to perform an easier task , was in great joy , thinking that the weather had begun to grow milder .
alas , how crooked is human judgment !
on the way she met thunder - and - lightning , who , seeing her walking at a quick pace , said to her , " whither are you going , wretched girl ?
see you not that you are on the way to the slaughter ; that you are forging your own fetters , and sharpening the knife and mixing the poison for yourself ; that you are sent to the ogress for her to swallow you ?
but listen to me and fear not .
take this little loaf , this bundle of hay , and this stone ; and when you come to the house of my aunt , you will find a bulldog , which will fly barking at you to bite you ; but give him this little loaf , and it will stop his throat .
and when you have passed the dog , you will meet a horse running loose , which will run up to kick and trample on you ; but give him the hay , and you will clog his feet .
at last you will come to a door , banging to and fro continually ; put this stone before it , and you will stop its fury .
then mount upstairs and you find the ogress , with a little child in her arms , and the oven ready heated to bake you .
whereupon she will say to you , hold this little creature , and wait here till i go and fetch the instruments .'
but mind -- she will only go to whet her tusks , in order to tear you in pieces .
then throw the little child into the oven without pity , take the instruments which stand behind the door , and hie off before the ogress returns , or else you are lost .
the instruments are in a box , but beware of opening it , or you will repent .
" parmetella did all that thunder - and - lightning told her ; but on her way back with the instruments she opened the box , and lo and behold !
they all flew out and about -- here a flute , there a flageolet , here a pipe , there a bagpipe , making a thousand different sounds in the air , whilst parmetella stood looking on and tearing her hair in despair . meanwhile the ogress came downstairs , and not finding parmetella , she went to the window , and called out to the door , " crush that traitress !"
but the door answered :" i will not use the poor girl ill , for she has made me at last stand still .
" then the ogress cried out to the horse , " trample on the thief !"
but the horse replied :" let the poor girl go her way , for she has given me the hay .
" and lastly , the ogress called to the dog , saying , " bite the rogue !"
but the dog answered :" i ' ll not hurt a hair of her head , for she it was who gave me the bread .
" now as parmetella ran crying after the instruments , she met thunder - and - lightning , who scolded her well , saying , " traitress , will you not learn at your cost that by your fatal curiosity you are brought to this plight ?"
then he called back the instruments with a whistle , and shut them up again in the box , telling parmetella to take them to his mother .
but when the ogress saw her , she cried aloud , " o cruel fate !
even my sister is against me , and refuses to give me this pleasure .
" meanwhile the new bride arrived -- a hideous pest , a compound of ugliness , a harpy , an evil shade , a horror , a monster , a large tub , who with a hundred flowers and boughs about her looked like a newly opened inn .
then the ogress made a great banquet for her ; and being full of gall and malice , she had the table placed close to a well , where she seated her seven daughters , each with a torch in one hand ; but she gave two torches to parmetella , and made her sit at the edge of the well , on purpose that , when she fell asleep , she might tumble to the bottom . now whilst the dishes were passing to and fro , and their blood began to get warm , thunder - and - lightning , who turned quite sick at the sight of the new bride , said to parmetella , " traitress , do you love me ?"
" ay , to the top of the roof ," she replied .
and he answered , " if you love me , give me a kiss ."
" nay ," said parmetella , " you indeed , who have such a pretty creature at your side !
heaven preserve her to you a hundred years in health and with plenty of sons !"
then the new bride answered , " it is very clear that you are a simpleton , and would remain so were you to live a hundred years , acting the prude as you do , and refusing to kiss so handsome a youth , whilst i let a herdsman kiss me for a couple of chestnuts .
" at these words the bridegroom swelled with rage like a toad , so that his food remained sticking in his throat ; however , he put a good face on the matter and swallowed the pill , intending to make the reckoning and settle the balance afterwards .
but when the tables were removed , and the ogress and his sisters had gone away , thunder - and - lightning said to the new bride , " wife , did you see this proud creature refuse me a kiss ?"
" she was a simpleton ," replied the bride , " to refuse a kiss to such a handsome young man , whilst i let a herdsman kiss me for a couple of chestnuts .
" thunder - and - lightning could contain himself no longer ; the mustard got up into his nose , and with the flash of scorn and the thunder of action , he seized a knife and stabbed the bride , and digging a hole in the cellar he buried her .
then embracing parmetella he said to her , " you are my jewel , the flower of women , the mirror of honour !
then turn those eyes upon me , give me that hand , put out those lips , draw near to me , my heart !
for i will be yours as long as the world lasts .
" the next morning , when the sun aroused his fiery steeds from their watery stable , and drove them to pasture on the fields sown by the dawn , the ogress came with fresh eggs for the newly married couple , that the young wife might be able to say , " happy is she who marries and gets a mother - in - law !"
but finding parmetella in the arms of her son , and hearing what had passed , she ran to her sister , to concert some means of removing this thorn from her eyes without her son ' s being able to prevent it .
but when she found that her sister , out of grief at the loss of her daughter , had crept into the oven herself and was burnt , her despair was so great , that from an ogress she became a ram , and butted her head against the wall under she broke her pate .
then thunder - and - lightning made peace between parmetella and her sisters - in - law , and they all lived happy and content , finding the saying come true , that --" patience conquers all ."
