woe to him who thinks to find a governess for his children by giving them a stepmother !
he only brings into his house the cause of their ruin .
there never yet was a stepmother who looked kindly on the children of another ; or if by chance such a one were ever found , she would be regarded as a miracle , and be called a white crow .
but beside all those of whom you may have heard , i will now tell you of another , to be added to the list of heartless stepmothers , whom you will consider well deserving the punishment she purchased for herself with ready money . there was once a good man named jannuccio , who had two children , nennillo and nennella , whom he loved as much as his own life .
but death having , with the smooth file of time , severed the prison - bars of his wife ' s soul , he took to himself a cruel woman , who had no sooner set foot in his house than she began to ride the high horse , saying , " am i come here indeed to look after other folk ' s children ?
a pretty job i have undertaken , to have all this trouble and be for ever teased by a couple of squalling brats !
would that i had broken my neck ere i ever came to this place , to have bad food , worse drink , and get no sleep at night !
here ' s a life to lead !
forsooth i came as a wife , and not as a servant ; but i must find some means of getting rid of these creatures , or it will cost me my life : better to blush once than to grow pale a hundred times ; so i ' ve done with them , for i am resolved to send them away , or to leave the house myself for ever .
" the poor husband , who had some affection for this woman , said to her , " softly , wife !
don ' t be angry , for sugar is dear ; and to - morrow morning , before the cock crows , i will remove this annoyance in order to please you ."
so the next morning , ere the dawn had hung out the red counterpane at the window of the east to air it , jannuccio took the children , one by each hand , and with a good basketful of things to eat upon his arm , he led them to a wood , where an army of poplars and beech - trees were holding the shades besieged .
then jannuccio said , " my little children , stay here in this wood , and eat and drink merrily ; but if you want anything , follow this line of ashes which i have been strewing as we came along ; this will be a clue to lead you out of the labyrinth and bring you straight home ."
then giving them both a kiss , he returned weeping to his house . but at the hour when all creatures , summoned by the constables of night , pay to nature the tax of needful repose , the two children began to feel afraid at remaining in that lonesome place , where the waters of a river , which was thrashing the impertinent stones for obstructing its course , would have frightened even a hero .
so they went slowly along the path of ashes , and it was already midnight ere they reached their home .
when pascozza , their stepmother , saw the children , she acted not like a woman , but a perfect fury ; crying aloud , wringing her hands , stamping with her feet , snorting like a frightened horse , and exclaiming , " what fine piece of work is this ?
is there no way of ridding the house of these creatures ?
is it possible , husband , that you are determined to keep them here to plague my very life out ?
go , take them out of my sight !
i ' ll not wait for the crowing of cocks and the cackling of hens ; or else be assured that to - morrow morning i ' ll go off to my parents ' house , for you do not deserve me .
i have not brought you so many fine things , only to be made the slave of children who are not my own .
" poor jannuccio , who saw that matters were growing rather too warm , immediately took the little ones and returned to the wood ; where giving the children another basketful of food , he said to them , " you see , my dears , how this wife of mine -- who is come to my house to be your ruin and a nail in my heart -- hates you ; therefore remain in this wood , where the trees , more compassionate , will give you shelter from the sun ; where the river , more charitable , will give you drink without poison ; and the earth , more kind , will give you a pillow of grass without danger .
and when you want food , follow this little path of bran which i have made for you in a straight line , and you can come and seek what you require ."
so saying , he turned away his face , not to let himself be seen to weep and dishearten the poor little creatures . when nennillo and nennella had eaten all that was in the basket , they wanted to return home ; but alas !
a jackass -- the son of ill - luck -- had eaten up all the bran that was strewn upon the ground ; so they lost their way , and wandered about forlorn in the wood for several days , feeding on acorns and chestnuts which they found fallen on the ground .
but as heaven always extends its arm over the innocent , there came by chance a prince to hunt in that wood .
then nennillo , hearing the baying of the hounds , was so frightened that he crept into a hollow tree ; and nennella set off running at full speed , and ran until she came out of the wood , and found herself on the seashore .
now it happened that some pirates , who had landed there to get fuel , saw nennella and carried her off ; and their captain took her home with him where he and his wife , having just lost a little girl , took her as their daughter . meantime nennillo , who had hidden himself in the tree , was surrounded by the dogs , which made such a furious barking that the prince sent to find out the cause ; and when he discovered the pretty little boy , who was so young that he could not tell who were his father and mother , he ordered one of the huntsmen to set him upon his saddle and take him to the royal palace .
then he had him brought up with great care , and instructed in various arts , and among others , he had him taught that of a carver ; so that , before three or four years had passed , nennillo became so expert in his art that he could carve a joint to a hair . now about this time it was discovered that the captain of the ship who had taken nennella to his house was a sea - robber , and the people wished to take him prisoner ; but getting timely notice from the clerks in the law - courts , who were his friends , and whom he kept in his pay , he fled with all his family .
it was decreed , however , perhaps by the judgment of heaven , that he who had committed his crimes upon the sea , upon the sea should suffer the punishment of them ; for having embarked in a small boat , no sooner was he upon the open sea than there came such a storm of wind and tumult of the waves , that the boat was upset and all were drowned -- all except nennella , who having had no share in the corsair ' s robberies , like his wife and children , escaped the danger ; for just then a large enchanted fish , which was swimming about the boat , opened its huge throat and swallowed her down . the little girl now thought to herself that her days were surely at an end , when suddenly she found a thing to amaze her inside the fish ,-- beautiful fields and fine gardens , and a splendid mansion , with all that heart could desire , in which she lived like a princess .
then she was carried quickly by the fish to a rock , where it chanced that the prince had come to escape the burning heat of a summer , and to enjoy the cool sea - breezes .
and whilst a great banquet was preparing , nennillo had stepped out upon a balcony of the palace on the rock to sharpen some knives , priding himself greatly on acquiring honour from his office .
when nennella saw him through the fish ' s throat , she cried aloud ," brother , brother , your task is done , the tables are laid out every one ; but here in the fish i must sit and sigh , o brother , without you i soon shall die .
" nennillo at first paid no attention to the voice , but the prince , who was standing on another balcony and had also heard it , turned in the direction whence the sound came , and saw the fish .
and when he again heard the same words , he was beside himself with amazement , and ordered a number of servants to try whether by any means they could ensnare the fish and draw it to land .
at last , hearing the words " brother , brother !"
continually repeated , he asked all his servants , one by one , whether any of them had lost a sister .
and nennillo replied , that he recollected , as a dream , having had a sister when the prince found him in the wood , but that he had never since heard any tidings of her .
then the prince told him to go nearer to the fish , and see what was the matter , for perhaps this adventure might concern him .
as soon as nennillo approached the fish , it raised up its head upon the rock , and opening its throat six palms wide , nennella stepped out , so beautiful that she looked just like a nymph in some interlude , come forth from that animal at the incantation of a magician .
and when the prince asked her how it had all happened , she told him a part of her sad story , and the hatred of their stepmother ; but not being able to recollect the name of their father nor of their home , the prince caused a proclamation to be issued , commanding that whoever had lost two children , named nennillo and nennella , in a wood , should come to the royal palace , and he would there receive joyful news of them . jannuccio , who had all this time passed a sad and disconsolate life , believing that his children had been devoured by wolves , now hastened with the greatest joy to seek the prince , and told him that he had lost the children .
and when he had related the story , how he had been compelled to take them to the wood , the prince gave him a good scolding , calling him a blockhead for allowing a woman to put her heel upon his neck till he was brought to send away two such jewels as his children .
but after he had broken jannuccio ' s head with these words , he applied to it the plaster of consolation , showing him the children , whom the father embraced and kissed for half an hour without being satisfied .
then the prince made him pull off his jacket , and had him dressed like a lord ; and sending for jannuccio ' s wife , he showed her those two golden pippins , asked her what that person would deserve who should do them any harm , and even endanger their lives .
and she replied , " for my part , i would put her into a closed cask , and send her rolling down a mountain .
"" so it shall be done !"
said the prince .
" the goat has butted at herself .
quick now !
you have passed the sentence , and you must suffer it , for having borne these beautiful stepchildren such malice ."
so he gave orders that the sentence should be instantly executed .
then choosing a very rich lord among his vassals , he gave him nennella to wife , and the daughter of another great lord to nennillo ; allowing them enough to live upon , with their father , so that they wanted for nothing in the world .
but the stepmother , shut into the cask and shut out from life , kept on crying through the bunghole as long as she had breath --" to him who mischief seeks , shall mischief fall ; there comes an hour that recompenses all ."
