well was it in truth said by the wise man , " do not say all you know , nor do all you are able "; for both one and the other bring unknown danger and unforeseen ruin ; as you shall hear of a certain slave ( be it spoken with all reverence for my lady the princess ), who , after doing all the injury in her power to a poor girl , came off so badly in the court , that she was the judge of her own crime , and sentenced herself to the punishment she deserved . the king of long - tower had once a son , who was the apple of his eye , and on whom he had built all his hopes ; and he longed impatiently for the time when he should find some good match for him .
but the prince was so averse to marriage and so obstinate that , whenever a wife was talked of , he shook his head and wished himself a hundred miles off ; so that the poor king , finding his son stubborn and perverse , and foreseeing that his race would come to an end , was more vexed and melancholy , cast down and out of spirits , than a merchant whose correspondent has become bankrupt , or a peasant whose ass has died .
neither could the tears of his father move the prince , nor the entreaties of the courtiers soften him , nor the counsel of wise men make him change his mind ; in vain they set before his eyes the wishes of his father , the wants of the people , and his own interest , representing to him that he was the full - stop in the line of the royal race ; for with the obstinacy of carella and the stubbornness of an old mule with a skin four fingers thick , he had planted his foot resolutely , stopped his ears , and closed his heart against all assaults .
but as frequently more comes to pass in an hour than in a hundred years , and no one can say , stop here or go there , it happened that one day , when all were at table , and the prince was cutting a piece of new - made cheese , whilst listening to the chit - chat that was going on , he accidentally cut his finger ; and two drops of blood , falling upon the cheese , made such a beautiful mixture of colours that -- either it was a punishment inflicted by love , or the will of heaven to console the poor father -- the whim seized the prince to find a woman exactly as white and red as that cheese tinged with blood .
then he said to his father , " sir , unless i have a wife as white and red as this cheese , it is all over with me ; so now resolve , if you wish to see me alive and well , to give me all i require to go through the world in search of a beauty exactly like this cheese , or else i shall end my life and die by inches .
" when the king heard this mad resolution , he thought the house was falling about his ears ; his colour came and went , but as soon as he recovered himself and could speak , he said , " my son , the life of my soul , the core of my heart , the prop of my old age , what mad - brained fancy has made you take leave of your senses ?
have you lost your wits ?
you want either all or nothing : first you wish not to marry , on purpose to deprive me of an heir , and now you are impatient to drive me out of the world .
whither , o whither would you go wandering about , wasting your life ?
and why leave your house , your hearth , your home ?
you know not what toils and peril he brings on himself who goes rambling and roving .
let this whim pass , my son ; be sensible , and do not wish to see my life worn out , this house fall to the ground , my household go to ruin .
" but these and other words went in at one ear and out at the other , and were all cast upon the sea ; and the poor king , seeing that his son was as immovable as a rook upon a belfry , gave him a handful of dollars and two or three servants ; and bidding him farewell , he felt as if his soul was torn out of his body .
then weeping bitterly , he went to a balcony , and followed his son with his eyes until he was lost to sight . the prince departed , leaving his unhappy father to his grief , and hastened on his way through fields and woods , over mountain and valley , hill and plain , visiting various countries , and mixing with various peoples , and always with his eyes wide awake to see whether he could find the object of his desire .
at the end of several months he arrived at the coast of france , where , leaving his servants at a hospital with sore feet , he embarked alone in a genoese boat , and set out towards the straits of gibraltar .
there he took a larger vessel and sailed for the indies , seeking everywhere , from kingdom to kingdom , from province to province , from country to country , from street to street , from house to house , in every hole and corner , whether he could find the original likeness of that beautiful image which he had pictured to his heart .
and he wandered about and about until at length he came to the island of the ogresses , where he cast anchor and landed .
there he found an old , old woman , withered and shrivelled up , and with a hideous face , to whom he related the reason that had brought him to the country .
the old woman was beside herself with amazement when she heard the strange whim and the fancy of the prince , and the toils and perils he had gone through to satisfy himself ; then she said to him , " hasten away , my son !
for if my three daughters meet you i would not give a farthing for your life ; half - alive and half - roasted , a frying - pan would be your bier and a belly your grave .
but away with you as fast as a hare , and you will not go far before you find what you are seeking !
" when the prince heard this , frightened , terrified , and aghast , he set off running at full speed , and ran till he came to another country , where he again met an old woman , more ugly even than the first , to whom he told all his story .
then the old woman said to him in like manner , " away with you !
unless you wish to serve as a breakfast to the little ogresses my daughters ; but go straight on , and you will soon find what you want .
" the prince , hearing this , set off running as fast as a dog with a kettle at its tail ; and he went on and on , until he met another old woman , who was sitting upon a wheel , with a basket full of little pies and sweetmeats on her arm , and feeding a number of jackasses , which thereupon began leaping about on the bank of a river and kicking at some poor swans .
when the prince came up to the old woman , after making a hundred salaams , he related to her the story of his wanderings ; whereupon the old woman , comforting him with kind words , gave him such a good breakfast that he licked his fingers after it .
and when he had done eating she gave him three citrons , which seemed to be just fresh gathered from the tree ; and she gave him also a beautiful knife , saying , " you are now free to return to italy , for your labour is ended , and you have what you were seeking .
go your way , therefore , and when you are near your own kingdom stop at the first fountain you come to and cut a citron .
then a fairy will come forth from it , and will say to you , give me to drink .'
mind and be ready with the water or she will vanish like quicksilver .
but if you are not quick enough with the second fairy , have your eyes open and be watchful that the third does not escape you , giving her quickly to drink , and you shall have a wife after your own heart .
" the prince , overjoyed , kissed the old woman ' s hairy hand a hundred times , which seemed just like a hedgehog ' s back .
then taking his leave he left that country , and coming to the seashore sailed for the pillars of hercules , and arrived at our sea , and after a thousand storms and perils , he entered port a day ' s distance from his own kingdom .
there he came to a most beautiful grove , where the shades formed a palace for the meadows , to prevent their being seen by the sun ; and dismounting at a fountain , which , with a crystal tongue , was inviting the people to refresh their lips , he seated himself on a syrian carpet formed by the plants and flowers .
then he drew his knife from the sheath and began to cut the first citron , when lo !
there appeared like a flash of lightning a most beautiful maiden , white as milk and red as a strawberry , who said , " give me to drink !"
the prince was so amazed , bewildered , and captivated with the beauty of the fairy that he did not give her the water quick enough , so she appeared and vanished at one and the same moment .
whether this was a rap on the prince ' s head , let any one judge who , after longing for a thing , gets it into his hands and instantly loses it again . then the prince cut the second citron , and the same thing happened again ; and this was a second blow he got on his pate ; so making two little fountains of his eyes , he wept , face to face , tear for tear , drop for drop , with the fountain , and sighing he exclaimed , " good heavens , how is it that i am so unfortunate ?
twice i have let her escape , as if my hands were tied ; and here i sit like a rock , when i ought to run like a greyhound .
faith indeed i have made a fine hand of it !
but courage , man !
there is still another , and three is the lucky number ; either this knife shall give me the fay , or it shall take my life away ."
so saying he cut the third citron , and forth came the third fairy , who said like the others , " give me to drink ."
then the prince instantly handed her the water ; and behold there stood before him a delicate maiden , white as a junket with red streaks ,-- a thing never before seen in the world , with a beauty beyond compare , a fairness beyond the beyonds , a grace more than the most .
on that hair jove had showered down gold , of which love made his shafts to pierce all hearts ; that face the god of love had tinged with red , that some innocent soul should be hung on the gallows of desire ; at those eyes the sun had lighted two fireworks , to set fire to the rockets of sighs in the breast of the beholder ; to the roses on those lips venus had given their colour , to wound a thousand enamoured hearts with their thorns .
in a word , she was so beautiful from head to foot , that a more exquisite creature was never seen .
the prince knew not what had happened to him , and stood lost in amazement , gazing on such a beautiful offspring of a citron ; and he said to himself , " are you asleep or awake , ciommetiello ?
are your eyes bewitched , or are you blind ?
what fair white creature is this come forth from a yellow rind ?
what sweet fruit , from the sour juice of a citron ?
what lovely maiden sprung from a citron - pip ?
" at length , seeing that it was all true and no dream , he embraced the fairy , giving her a hundred and a hundred kisses ; and after a thousand tender words had passed between them -- words which , as a setting , had an accompaniment of sugared kisses -- the prince said , " my soul , i cannot take you to my father ' s kingdom without handsome raiment worthy of so beautiful a person , and an attendance befitting a queen ; therefore climb up into this oak - tree , where nature seems purposely to have made for us a hiding - place in the form of a little room , and here await my return ; for i will come back on wings , before a tear can be dry , with dresses and servants , and carry you off to my kingdom ."
so saying , after the usual ceremonies , he departed . now a black slave , who was sent by her mistress with a pitcher to fetch water , came to the well , and seeing by chance the reflection of the fairy in the water , she thought it was herself , and exclaimed in amazement , " poor lucia , what do i see ?
me so pretty and fair , and mistress send me here .
no , me will no longer bear ."
so saying she broke the pitcher and returned home ; and when her mistress asked her , " why have you done this mischief ?"
she replied , " me go to the well alone , pitcher break upon a stone ."
her mistress swallowed this idle story , and the next day she gave her a pretty little cask , telling her to go and fill it with water .
so the slave returned to the fountain , and seeing again the beautiful image reflected in the water , she said with a deep sigh , " me no ugly slave , me no broad - foot goose , but pretty and fine as mistress mine , and me not go to the fountain !"
so saying , smash again !
she broke the cask into seventy pieces , and returned grumbling home , and said to her mistress , " ass come past , tub fell down at the well , and all was broken in pieces ."
the poor mistress , on hearing this , could contain herself no longer , and seizing a broomstick she beat the slave so soundly that she felt it for many days ; then giving her a leather bag , she said , " run , break your neck , you wretched slave , you grasshopper - legs , you black beetle !
run and fetch me this bag full of water , or else i ' ll hang you like a dog , and give you a good thrashing .
" away ran the slave heels over head , for she had seen the flash and dreaded the thunder ; and while she was filling the leather bag , she turned to look again at the beautiful image , and said , " me fool to fetch water !
better live by one ' s wits ; such a pretty girl indeed to serve a bad mistress !"
so saying , she took a large pin which she wore in her hair , and began to pick holes in the leather bag , which looked like an open place in a garden with the rose of a watering - pot making a hundred little fountains .
when the fairy saw this she laughed outright ; and the slave hearing her , turned and espied her hiding - place up in the tree ; whereat she said to herself , " o ho !
you make me be beaten ?
but never mind !"
then she said to her , " what you doing up there , pretty lass ?"
and the fairy , who was the very mother of courtesy , told her all she knew , and all that had passed with the prince , whom she was expecting from hour to hour and from moment to moment , with fine dresses and servants , to take her with him to his father ' s kingdom where they would live happy together . when the slave , who was full of spite , heard this , she thought to herself that she would get this prize into her own hands ; so she answered the fairy , " you expect your husband ,-- me come up and comb your locks , and make you more smart ."
and the fairy said , " ay , welcome as the first of may !"
so the slave climbed up the tree , and the fairy held out her white hand to her , which looked in the black paws of the slave like a crystal mirror in a frame of ebony .
but no sooner did the slave begin to comb the fairy ' s locks , than she suddenly stuck a hairpin into her head .
then the fairy , feeling herself pricked , cried out , " dove , dove !"
and instantly she became a dove and flew away ; whereupon the slave stripped herself , and making a bundle of all the rags that she had worn , she threw them a mile away ; and there she sat , up in the tree , looking like a statue of jet in a house of emerald . in a short time the prince returned with a great cavalcade , and finding a cask of caviar where he had left a pan of milk , he stood for awhile beside himself with amazement .
at length he said , " who has made this great blot of ink on the fine paper upon which i thought to write the brightest days of my life ?
who has hung with mourning this newly white - washed house , where i thought to spend a happy life ?
how comes it that i find this touchstone , where i left a mine of silver , that was to make me rich and happy ?"
but the crafty slave , observing the prince ' s amazement , said , " do not wonder , my prince ; for me turned by a wicked spell from a white lily to a black coal .
" the poor prince , seeing that there was no help for the mischief , drooped his head and swallowed this pill ; and bidding the slave come down from the tree , he ordered her to be clothed from head to foot in new dresses .
then sad and sorrowful , cast - down and woe - begone , he took his way back with the slave to his own country , where the king and queen , who had gone out six miles to meet them , received them with the same pleasure as a prisoner feels at the announcement of a sentence of hanging , seeing the fine choice their foolish son had made , who after travelling about so long to find a white dove had brought home at last a black crow .
however , as they could do no less , they gave up the crown to their children , and placed the golden tripod upon that face of coal . now whilst they were preparing splendid feasts and banquets , and the cooks were busy plucking geese , killing little pigs , flaying kids , basting the roast meat , skimming pots , mincing meat for dumplings , larding capons , and preparing a thousand other delicacies , a beautiful dove came flying to the kitchen window , and said ," o cook of the kitchen , tell me , i pray , what the king and the slave are doing to - day .
" the cook at first paid little heed to the dove ; but when she returned a second and a third time , and repeated the same words , he ran to the dining - hall to tell the marvellous thing .
but no sooner did the lady hear this music than she gave orders for the dove to be instantly caught and made into a hash .
so the cook went , and he managed to catch the dove , and did all that the slave had commanded .
and having scalded the bird in order to pluck it , he threw the water with the feathers out from a balcony on to a garden - bed , on which , before three days had passed , there sprang up a beautiful citron - tree , which quickly grew to its full size . now it happened that the king , going by chance to a window that looked upon the garden , saw the tree , which he had never observed before ; and calling the cook , he asked him when and by whom it had been planted .
no sooner had he heard all the particulars from master pot - ladle , than he began to suspect how matters stood .
so he gave orders , under pain of death , that the tree should not be touched , but that it should be tended with the greatest care . at the end of a few days three most beautiful citrons appeared , similar to those which the ogress had given ciommetiello .
and when they were grown larger , he plucked them ; and shutting himself up in a chamber , with a large basin of water and the knife , which he always carried at his side , he began to cut the citrons .
then it all fell out with the first and second fairy just as it had done before ; but when at last he cut the third citron , and gave the fairy who came forth from it to drink , behold , there stood before him the self - same maiden whom he had left up in the tree , and who told him all the mischief that the slave had done . who now can tell the least part of the delight the king felt at this good turn of fortune ?
who can describe the shouting and leaping for joy that there was ?
for the king was swimming in a sea of delight , and was wafted to heaven on a tide of rapture .
then he embraced the fairy , and ordered her to be handsomely dressed from head to foot ; and taking her by the hand he led her into the middle of the hall , where all the courtiers and great folks of the city were met to celebrate the feast .
then the king called on them one by one , and said , " tell me , what punishment would that person deserve who should do any harm to this beautiful lady !"
and one replied that such a person would deserve a hempen collar ; another , a breakfast of stones ; a third , a good beating ; a fourth , a draught of poison ; a fifth , a millstone for a brooch -- in short , one said this thing and another that .
at last he called on the black queen , and putting the same question , she replied , " such a person would deserve to be burned , and that her ashes should be thrown from the roof of the castle .
" when the king heard this , he said to her , " you have struck your own foot with the axe , you have made your own fetters , you have sharpened the knife and mixed the poison ; for no one has done this lady so much harm as yourself , you good - for - nothing creature !
know you that this is the beautiful maiden whom you wounded with the hairpin ?
know you that this is the pretty dove which you ordered to be killed and cooked in a stewpan ?
what say you now ?
it is all your own doing ; and one who does ill may expect ill in return ."
so saying , he ordered the slave to be seized and cast alive on to a large burning pile of wood ; and her ashes were thrown from the top of the castle to all the winds of heaven , verifying the truth of the saying that --" he who sows thorns should not go barefoot ."
