long , long ago , in days of yore , there lived a king who had three sons , all of them grown to manhood .
one day the king called them to him and said , " my sons .
let each of you make a bow for himself and shoot an arrow .
the maiden who brings your arrow back will be your bride ; and he whose arrow is not returned will stay unwed ."
the eldest son shot an arrow and a prince ' s daughter brought it back .
the middle son loosed an arrow and a general ' s daughter brought it back .
but young prince ivan ' s arrow fell into a marsh and was brought back by a frog holding it between her teeth .
the first two brothers were joyful and happy , but prince ivan was downcast and cried : " how can i live with a frog ?
marrying is for a lifetime , it isn ' t like wading a stream or crossing a field !"
he wept and wept but there was nothing for it : he had to marry the frog .
all three couples were wed together according to the custom — the frog being held aloft on a platter .
the princess frogsome time passed .
one day the king wished to see which bride was the best needle - woman .
so he ordered them to make him a shirt .
poor prince ivan was again downcast and cried : " how can my frog sew ?
i ' ll be a laughing stock ."
the frog only jumped across the floor croaking .
but no sooner was prince ivan asleep than she went outside , cast off her skin and turned into a beautiful maiden , calling .
" maids and matrons , sew me a shirt !"
the maids and matrons straightway brought a finely - embroidered shirt : she took it , folded it and placed it alongside prince ivan . there upon she turned back into a frog as if nothing had happened .
in the morning prince ivan awoke and was overjoyed to find the shirt which he took forthwith to the king .
the king gazed at it and said : " now there ' s a shirt for you , fit to wear on holy days !"
then the middle brother brought a shirt , at which the king said , " this shirt is fit only for the bath - house !"
and taking the eldest brother ' s shirt , he said , " and this one is fit only for a smoky peasant hut !"
the king ' s sons went their separate ways , with the two eldest muttering among themselves , " we were surely wrong to mock at prince ivan ' s wife ; she must be a cunning sorceress , not a frog .
" presently the king again issued a command : this time the daughters - in - law were each to bake a loaf of bread , and bring it to him to judge which bride was the best cook .
the other two brides had made fun of the frog , but now they sent a chamber - maid to see how she would bake her loaf .
the frog noticed the woman , so she kneaded some dough , rolled it out , made a hole in the stove and tipped the dough straight into the fire .
the chambermaid ran to tell her mistresses , the royal brides , and they proceeded to do the same .
but the crafty frog had tricked them ; as soon as . the woman had gone , she retrieved the dough , cleaned and mended the stove as if nothing had happened , then went out on to the porch , cast off her skin and called , " maids and matrons , bake me a loaf of bread such as my dear father used to eat on sundays and holidays ."
in an instant the maids and matrons brought the bread .
she took it , placed it beside prince ivan , and turned into a frog again .
in the morning prince ivan awoke , took the loaf of bread and gave it to his father .
his father was receiving the loaves brought by the elder brothers : their wives had dropped the dough into the fire just as the frog had done , so their bread was black and lumpy .
first the king took the eldest son ' s loaf , inspected it and despatched it to the kitchen . the princess frogthe princess frogthen he took the middle son ' s loaf and despatched it thither too .
then came prince ivan ' s turn : he presented his loaf to his father who looked at it and said , " now this is bread fit to grace a holy day .
it is not at all like the burnt offerings of my elder daughters - in - law !
" after that the king thought to hold a ball to see which of his sons ' wives was the best dancer .
au the guests and daughters - in - law assembled ; everyone was there except prince ivan , who thought : " how can i go to the ball with a frog ?"
and the poor prince began - to weep bitterly .
" do not cry , prince ivan ," said the frog .
" go to the ball .
i shall follow in an hour ."
prince ivan was somewhat cheered at the frog ' s words , and left for the ball .
then the frog cast off her skin and turned into a lovely maid dressed in finery .
when she arrived at the ball , prince ivan was overjoyed , and the guests clapped their hands at the sight of such beauty .
they began to eat and drink .
but the frog - princess would eat and slip the bones into her sleeve , then drink and pour the dregs into her other sleeve .
the elder brothers ' wives saw this and followed suit , slipping bones into one sleeve and dregs into the other .
when the time came for dancing , the king called upon his elder sons ' wives but they insisted on the frog - princess dancing first .
and she straightway took prince ivan ' s arm and came forward to dance .
she danced and danced , whirling round and round , to the delight of all .
when she shook her right sleeve , woods and lakes appeared ; when she shook her left sleeve , all kinds of birds flew about .
the guests were filled with wonder .
when she finished dancing , everything disappeared .
then the wives of the two elder sons began to dance .
they wished to do as the frog - princess had done , so they shook their right sleeves and bones flew out hitting folk about them ; and when they shook their left sleeves , water splashed all over the onlookers .
the king was most displeased and soon called an end to the dancing . the ball was over .
prince ivan rode off ahead of his wife , found the frogskin and burnt it .
so when his wife returned and looked for the skin , it was nowhere to be seen .
she lay down to sleep with prince ivan , but just before daybreak she said to him , " oh , prince ivan , if only you had waited a little longer i would have been yours .
now god alone knows when we shall meet again .
farewell .
if you wish to find me you must go beyond the thrice - nine land to the thrice - ten kingdom ."
and the frog - princess vanished . a year went by , and prince ivan still pined for his wife .
as a second year began , he made ready to leave , seeking first the blessing of his father and mother .
he rode for a long way and eventually chanced upon a little hut facing the trees , with its back to him .
" little hut , little hut ," he called .
' turn your face to me , please , and your back to the trees ."
the little hut did as he said and prince ivan entered .
there before him sat an old woman , who cried , " fie , foh !
there was neither sight nor sound of russian bones , yet now they come marching in of their own free will !
whither go you , prince ivan ?"
" first give me food and drink and put me to bed , old woman , then ask your questions ."
so the old woman gave food and drink and put him to bed .
then prince ivan said to her , " grannie , i have set out to rescue yelena the fair ."
" oh , my child ," the old woman said , " you ' ve waited too long !
at first she spoke of you often , but now she no longer remembers you .
i haven ' t seen her for a long time .
go now to my middle sister , she knows more than me ."
the princess frogin the morning prince ivan set out , came to another little hut , and cried , " little hut , little hut , turn your face to me , please , and your back to the trees ."
the little hut did as he said and prince ivan entered .
there before him sat an old woman , who cried , " fie , foh !
there was neither sight nor sound of russian bones , yet now they come marching in of their own free will !
whither go you .
prince ivan ?"
" i seek yelena the fair , grannie -," he replied .
" oh , prince ivan ," the old woman said , " you ' ve waited too long !
she has begun to forget you and is to marry another .
she is now living with my eldest sister ; go there now , but beware : as you approach they will know it is you .
yelena will turn into a spindle , her dress will turn to gold .
my sister will wind the gold thread around the spindle and put it into a box which she will lock .
but you must find the key , open the box , break the spindle , toss the top over your shoulder and the bottom before you .
then she will appear .
" off went prince ivan , came to the old woman ' s hut , entered and saw her wind - ing gold thread around a spindle ; she then locked it in a box and hid the key .
but prince ivan quickly found the key , opened the box , took out the spindle , broke it as he had been told , tossed the top over his shoulder and the bottom before him .
all of a sudden , there was yelena the fair standing in front of him .
" oh , prince ivan ,'' she sighed , " how long you were in coming !
i almost wed another ."
and she told him that the other bridegroom would soon arrive .
but , taking a magic carpet from the old woman , yelena the fair sat upon it and they soared up and away like birds .
the bridegroom set off quickly in pursuit .
he was clever and guessed that they had fled .
he was within ten feet of them when they flew on the carpet into rus .
just in time !
he could not follow them there , so he turned back .
but prince ivan and yelena the fair flew home to the rejoicing of all ; and lived happily ever after .
