all blessed meneca ' s mouth for relating with so much taste her story , which put before the eyes of the hearers doings that had happened so far away in such a manner that it caused envy to glow in tolla ' s breast , so that it made her wish from the marrow of her bones to excel and surpass meneca ; therefore , having first well cleared her throat , she began thus , in a clear voice : not a word is spoken which , if not all true , is not half true , and this is the reason that some one said , crooked face and straight venture ; and he knew the things of this world , or perhaps he had read the history of antony and palmiero , who had no eyebrows , and without birdlime caught becafico .
it is by experience that this world is the true portrait of the cuccagna , land of pleasure and felicity , where who works most gaineth least ; where he hath the best who taketh things as they come , and expecteth not that macaroni will fall down his throat ; as is truly known , and one touches it with hands , that plunder and the spoils of fortune are gained and won , not by the full - sailed galley , but by the darksome sailing boat , as ye shall hear from what i am going to relate . once upon a time there lived a beggarly old woman , who with distaff in hand , dabbling folk with her spittle on the way , used to step from door to door , begging alms , and since by craft and deceit one lives half the year round , she made some women , who were tender of lungs and easy of faith , believe that she was going to do i know not what to fatten a very thin daughter she had .
by thus begging , she gained the gift of seven pieces of pig ' s lard with the skin , which she took home with a quantity of straw and small bits of wood she had gathered by the way .
giving them to her daughter , she bade her cook them , whilst she went and begged of some gardeners an handful of greens to cook with them , and thus to make a tasty dish of food .
the daughter took the pieces of skin , and burning off the bristles , put the skins in the pot , and began to cook them .
but not so much did they boil in the pot , as they boiled in her throat , because the smell which came forth therefrom was a mortal defiance to taste its flavour in the field of appetite , and an immediate summons to the bank of gluttony , so much so , that after resisting for some time the temptation , at the last provoked by the natural odour that came forth from the pot , and drawn by her natural greed , and pulled by the throat by the hunger which gnawed at her entrails , she let herself slip , and tried a little of it , and the flavour being good , she said to herself , ' let him that feareth become a bailiff ; i am in it for this time ; let us eat , and let it come of clay , or nails , or other , ' tis but a pig ' s skin .
what will it be ?
whatever may it be ?
i have good skin upon my shoulders to pay for these skins ;' and thus saying , she put down the first , and feeling her stomach gnaw the more , took up the second ; and after wards she ate the third , and thus , one after the other , until she had eaten them all .
now having done this bad service , thinking of the error , and dreaming that the skins would stick in her throat , she bethought herself to blind her mother , and taking an old shoe , cut the sole in seven pieces , and put it in the pot . in the meanwhile her mother returned with a bunch of greens , and cutting them up in small bits with all the suckers , so as not to lose a crumb , when she saw that the pot boiled , she put all the greens therein , together with a quantity of lard , that a coachman , who had it left from greasing a carriage , gave her in alms .
then she bade her daughter lay a coarse cloth upon an old box of poplar wood , and bringing forth from a pair of saddle - bags two pieces of stale bread , and taking from a shelf a wooden basin , she cut up the bread within it , and threw upon it the greens with the old shoe - leather , and began to eat .
but at the first mouthful she perceived that her teeth were not for shoe - leather , and that the pig ' s skins , by a new ovid ' s transformation , had become the gizzard of a buffalo .
therefore she turned to her daughter , and said , ' thou hast done me brown , this time , thou whore accursed , and what filthiness hast thou put in the pottage ?
has my belly become an old shoe , that thou shouldst provide me with old leather ?
quick , do thou confess this moment , how this was done ; or say naught , and i will not leave thee a whole bone in thy body .'
saporita ( thus was the girl hight ) began to deny , but the old woman ' s vexation increasing , she blamed the smoke which had entered the pot and came forth from it , which had blinded her and caused her to do this evil deed .
and the old woman , seeing her food poisoned , and taking hold of a broomstick , began to work in good earnest , and more than seven times did she take it up and let it down , hitting anywhere as it fell .
and the daughter shrieked with loud shrieks , and at her cries a merchant who was passing by entered , and seeing the dog - like treatment dealt by the old woman to her daughter , he took the stick from her hand , and said to her , ' what hath this poor child done to thee , that thou hast a will to slay her ?
hast thou found her running a lance or breaking money - boxes ?
art thou not ashamed to treat thus a wretched child ?'
' thou knowest not what she hath done to me ,' answered the old woman , ' the shameless chit , she can see that i am a beggar , and she hath no consideration , and she would like to see me ruined by doctors and druggists : because having commanded her now that it is hot weather that she should not work so much , so that she should not fall sick , as i have naught with which to feed her , the presumptuous creature , in my despite , would fill seven spindles , risking by doing this to have some bad disease of the heart , and re main some two months in a bed of sickness .'
the merchant , hearing this , thought that the cleverness and industry of this damsel could make his house into a fairy ' s kingdom ; therefore he said to the old woman , ' leave off thine anger and cast it on one side , for i will deliver thee from this danger in thine house by taking this daughter of thine to wife , and lead her to my home , where i will entertain her as a princess , as by grace of heaven i bring up mine own fowls , and fatten mine own pigs , and keep pigeons , and i can hardly turn round in my house because of its fulness ; may the heavens bless me , and the evil eye have no power over me , for i have my casks full of corn , my press full of flour , my pitchers full of oil , my pots and bladders full of lard , and hams and salt provisions hanging by the roof beam , and the rack full of crocks , and heaps of wood , and mounds of coal , and safes of linen , a bed fit for a bride groom : and above all , from rents and interests , i can live like a mighty lord ; and besides , i gain safely in these fairs some ten ducats , and if business always went full sail i should soon be rich .'
the old woman , beholding this good fortune raining upon her when least she dreamt of it , taking saporita by the hand ( in the neapolitan custom and fashion ), consigned her to him , saying , ' here she is , may she be thine for many happy years with health and fine heritage .'
the merchant threw his arms round saporita ' s neck , and carried her home , and he was very anxious for the day to come when he would fare to the market to buy some flax for his wife to spin . when monday came he arose early in the morning , and wending where the country - women came , he bought twenty dozens of flax , and taking it to saporita , said to her , ' if thou hast a will to spin , be not afraid , as thou wilt not find another so madly enraged as thy mother , who used to break thy bones , if thou filledst the spindle ; whilst i , for every ten spindle - full will give thee ten kisses , and for every distaff - full i will give thee mine heart ; work thou then with a good will , and i will wend to the fair , where i shall tarry some twenty days , and when i return from the fair , do thou let me find these ten dozen of flax all ready spinned , and i will buy thee a fine pair of sleeves of russian cloth trimmed with green velvet .'
' thou mayest go an thou art ready ,' said saporita to herself , ' thou hast filled my spindle , yes , run and light the fire .
an thou expectest a shirt out of my hands , thou canst provide thyself from this moment of blotting - paper ; thou hast found her , and ' twas milk of the black goat , to spin twenty dozens of flax in twenty days .
may evil happen to the boat that brought thee in this country .
go , for thou hast the time , and thou shalt find the flax spun when the liver groweth hair , and the ape a tail .
' in the meanwhile her husband fared on his journey , and she , who was as greedy and gluttonous as she was lazy , did not wait long before she began to mix flour , and take the oil , and cook fritters , and make cakes , and from morning till night she did naught else , but gnaw and munch like a mouse , and eat like a pig .
but now when the term arrived of her husband ' s return , she began to spin very fine , considering the noise and great fracas that would occur when the merchant came back and found the flax untouched , and the press and pitchers empty ; and therefore , taking a long perch , wound round it a dozen of the flax with all the tow and the rest , and hanging upon a big fork an indian vegetable marrow , and tying the perch at one side of the wall of the terrace , she began to lower this father abbot of spindles down the terrace , keeping by her side a cauldron full of macaroni broth instead of the saucer full of water , and whilst she spinned like a ship ' s rope , every time she dipped her fingers in water she played a carnival game with the passers - by .
now passed that way three fairies , and they enjoyed so much the sight of this ugly vision , that they laughed till they fell back wards : and for this cause they cried , ' may all the flax in that house be found spun , and made into cloth , and whitened ,' which thing was done at once , and saporita swam in the fat of en joyance , sighting this good venture raining upon her from heaven .
but so that no more of this kind of enjoyance should befall her from her husband , she let him find her in bed , having first spread on it a measure of hazel - nuts ; and when the merchant arrived , she began to lament , and turning first one side then the other she cracked the nuts , which made a sound as if the bones unhinged one from the other ; and her husband asking of her how it was with her , she answered him with a very melancholic voice , ' i cannot be much worse , than i am now , o my husband , i have not a whole bone in my body ; and what does it seem to thee but a little grass for the sheep , to skin twenty dozen of flax in twenty days , and to weave the cloth also ?
wend thy ways , o my husband , for thou hast not paid my mother , and discretion has been eaten by the ass ; when i shall be dead , my mother will not give birth to another like me , and therefore thou wilt not catch me any more at these dog ' s works ; and i do not wish to fill so many spindles that i break the spindle of my life .
' the husband made her a thousand caresses , and said to her , ' be thou well once more , o my darling wife , as i desire much more this beauteous loving frame than all the cloths in the world ; and now i know that thy mother was right in chastising thee for so much work , because thou losest thine health .
but be of good cheer .
i shall spend an eye of my head to get thee back to health , and wait a while , i shall go at once for the doctor ;' and thus saying , he went at once to call messer cattupolo .
whereupon saporita ate up all the nuts , and threw the shells out of the window , and when the doctor came , feeling her pulse , and observing her face , and looking in the chamber - pot , and smelling in the night - vase , he concluded with galenus and hippocrates that her malady was superfluous blood , and from doing naught ; and the merchant , thinking he heard nonsense , putting a carlino in his hand , sent him off warm and stinking ; and wanting to go for another physician , saporita told him that there was no need , because the sight of him only had cured her ; and so her hus band embraced her , and said that from that time forth she should enjoy herself without work , because it was impossible to have a greek and cabbages ,' the cask full , and the slave - girl drunk .'
