once upon a time there lived a poor fisher who built a hut on the banks of a stream which , shunning the glare of the sun and the noise of the towns , flowed quietly past trees and under bushes , listening to the songs of the birds overhead . one day , when the fisherman had gone out as usual to cast his nets , he saw borne towards him on the current a cradle of crystal .
slipping his net quickly beneath it he drew it out and lifted the silk coverlet .
inside , lying on a soft bed of cotton , were two babies , a boy and a girl , who opened their eyes and smiled at him .
the man was filled with pity at the sight , and throwing down his lines he took the cradle and the babies home to his wife . the good woman flung up her hands in despair when she beheld the contents of the cradle .
' are not eight children enough ,' she cried , ' without bringing us two more ?
how do you think we can feed them ?
'' you would not have had me leave them to die of hunger ,' answered he , ' or be swallowed up by the waves of the sea ?
what is enough for eight is also enough for ten .
' the wife said no more ; and in truth her heart yearned over the little creatures .
somehow or other food was never lacking in the hut , and the children grew up and were so good and gentle that , in time , their foster - parents loved them as well or better than their own , who were quarrelsome and envious .
it did not take the orphans long to notice that the boys did not like them , and were always playing tricks on them , so they used to go away by themselves and spend whole hours by the banks of the river .
here they would take out the bits of bread they had saved from their breakfasts and crumble them for the birds .
in return , the birds taught them many things : how to get up early in the morning , how to sing , and how to talk their language , which very few people know . but though the little orphans did their best to avoid quarrelling with their foster - brothers , it was very difficult always to keep the peace .
matters got worse and worse till , one morning , the eldest boy said to the twins :' it is all very well for you to pretend that you have such good manners , and are so much better than we , but we have at least a father and mother , while you have only got the river , like the toads and the frogs .
' the poor children did not answer the insult ; but it made them very unhappy .
and they told each other in whispers that they could not stay there any longer , but must go into the world and seek their fortunes . so next day they arose as early as the birds and stole downstairs without anybody hearing them .
one window was open , and they crept softly out and ran to the side of the river .
then , feeling as if they had found a friend , they walked along its banks , hoping that by - and - by they should meet some one to take care of them . the whole of that day they went steadily on without seeing a living creature , till , in the evening , weary and footsore , they saw before them a small hut .
this raised their spirits for a moment ; but the door was shut , and the hut seemed empty , and so great was their disappointment that they almost cried .
however , the boy fought down his tears , and said cheerfully :' well , at any rate here is a bench where we can sit down , and when we are rested we will think what is best to do next .
' then they sat down , and for some time they were too tired even to notice anything ; but by - and - by they saw that under the tiles of the roof a number of swallows were sitting , chattering merrily to each other .
of course the swallows had no idea that the children understood their language , or they would not have talked so freely ; but , as it was , they said whatever came into their heads .
' good evening , my fine city madam ,' remarked a swallow , whose manners were rather rough and countryfied to another who looked particularly distinguished .
' happy , indeed , are the eyes that behold you !
only think of your having returned to your long - forgotten country friends , after you have lived for years in a palace !
'' i have inherited this nest from my parents ,' replied the other , ' and as they left it to me i certainly shall make it my home .
but ,' she added politely , ' i hope that you and all your family are well ?
'' very well indeed , i am glad to say .
but my poor daughter had , a short time ago , such bad inflammation in her eyes that she would have gone blind had i not been able to find the magic herb , which cured her at once .
'' and how is the nightingale singing ?
does the lark soar as high as ever ?
and does the linnet dress herself as smartly ?'
but here the country swallow drew herself up .
' i never talk gossip ,' she said severely .
' our people , who were once so innocent and well - behaved , have been corrupted by the bad examples of men .
it is a thousand pities .'' what !
innocence and good behaviour are not to be met with among birds , nor in the country !
my dear friend , what are you saying ?
'' the truth and nothing more .
imagine , when we returned here , we met some linnets who , just as the spring and the flowers and the long days had come , were setting out for the north and the cold ?
out of pure compassion we tried to persuade them to give up this folly ; but they only replied with the utmost insolence .
'' how shocking !'
exclaimed the city swallow .
' yes , it was .
and worse than that , the crested lark , that was formerly so timid and shy , is now no better than a thief , and steals maize and corn whenever she can find them .
'' i am astonished at what you say .
'' you will be more astonished when i tell you that on my arrival here for the summer i found my nest occupied by a shameless sparrow !
" this is my nest ," i said .
" yours ?"
he answered , with a rude laugh .
" yes , mine ; my ancestors were born here , and my sons will be born here also ."
and at that my husband set upon him and threw him out of the nest .
i am sure nothing of this sort ever happens in a town .
'' not exactly , perhaps .
but i have seen a great deal -- if you only knew !'' oh !
do tell us !
do tell us !'
cried they all .
and when they had settled themselves comfortably , the city swallow began :' you must know , then that our king fell in love with the youngest daughter of a tailor , who was as good and gentle as she was beautiful .
his nobles hoped that he would have chosen a queen from one of their daughters , and tried to prevent the marriage ; but the king would not listen to them , and it took place .
not many months later a war broke out , and the king rode away at the head of his army , while the queen remained behind , very unhappy at the separation .
when peace was made , and the king returned , he was told that his wife had had two babies in his absence , but that both were dead ; that she herself had gone out of her mind and was obliged to be shut up in a tower in the mountains , where , in time , the fresh air might cure her .
'' and was this not true ?'
asked the swallows eagerly .
' of course not ,' answered the city lady , with some contempt for their stupidity .
' the children were alive at that very moment in the gardener ' s cottage ; but at night the chamberlain came down and put them in a cradle of crystal , which he carried to the river .
' for a whole day they floated safely , for though the stream was deep it was very still , and the children took no harm .
in the morning -- so i am told by my friend the kingfisher -- they were rescued by a fisherman who lived near the river bank .
' the children had been lying on the bench , listening lazily to the chatter up to this point ; but when they heard the story of the crystal cradle which their foster - mother had always been fond of telling them , they sat upright and looked at each other .
' oh , how glad i am i learnt the birds ' language !'
said the eyes of one to the eyes of the other . meanwhile the swallows had spoken again .
' that was indeed good fortune !'
cried they .
' and when the children are grown up they can return to their father and set their mother free .
'' it will not be so easy as you think ,' answered the city swallow , shaking her head ; ' for they will have to prove that they are the king ' s children , and also that their mother never went mad at all .
in fact , it is so difficult that there is only one way of proving it to the king .
'' and what is that ?'
cried all the swallows at once .
' and how do you know it ?
'' i know it ,' answered the city swallow , ' because , one day , when i was passing through the palace garden , i met a cuckoo , who , as i need not tell you , always pretends to be able to see into the future .
we began to talk about certain things which were happening in the palace , and of the events of past years .
" ah ," said he , " the only person who can expose the wickedness of the ministers and show the king how wrong he has been , is the bird of truth , who can speak the language of men .
"'" and where can this bird be found ?"
i asked .
'" it is shut up in a castle guarded by a fierce giant , who only sleeps one quarter of an hour out of the whole twenty - four ," replied the cuckoo .
' and where is this castle ?'
inquired the country swallow , who , like all the rest , and the children most of all , had been listening with deep attention .
' that is just what i don ' t know ,' answered her friend .
' all i can tell you is that not far from here is a tower , where dwells an old witch , and it is she who knows the way , and she will only teach it to the person who promises to bring her the water from the fountain of many colours , which she uses for her enchantments .
but never will she betray the place where the bird of truth is hidden , for she hates him , and would kill him if she could ; knowing well , however , that this bird cannot die , as he is immortal , she keeps him closely shut up , and guarded night and day by the birds of bad faith , who seek to gag him so that his voice should not be heard .
'' and is there no one else who can tell the poor boy where to find the bird , if he should ever manage to reach the tower ?'
asked the country swallow .
' no one ,' replied the city swallow , ' except an owl , who lives a hermit ' s life in that desert , and he knows only one word of man ' s speech , and that is " cross ."
so that even if the prince did succeed in getting there , he could never understand what the owl said .
but , look , the sun is sinking to his nest in the depths of the sea , and i must go to mine .
good - night , friends , good - night !
' then the swallow flew away , and the children , who had forgotten both hunger and weariness in the joy of this strange news , rose up and followed in the direction of her flight .
after two hours ' walking , they arrived at a large city , which they felt sure must be the capital of their father ' s kingdom .
seeing a good - natured looking woman standing at the door of a house , they asked her if she would give them a night ' s lodging , and she was so pleased with their pretty faces and nice manners that she welcomed them warmly . it was scarcely light the next morning before the girl was sweeping out the rooms , and the boy watering the garden , so that by the time the good woman came downstairs there was nothing left for her to do .
this so delighted her that she begged the children to stay with her altogether , and the boy answered that he would leave his sisters with her gladly , but that he himself had serious business on hand and must not linger in pursuit of it .
so he bade them farewell and set out . for three days he wandered by the most out - of - the - way paths , but no signs of a tower were to be seen anywhere .
on the fourth morning it was just the same , and , filled with despair , he flung himself on the ground under a tree and hid his face in his hands .
in a little while he heard a rustling over his head , and looking up , he saw a turtle dove watching him with her bright eyes .
' oh dove !'
cried the boy , addressing the bird in her own language , ' oh dove !
tell me , i pray you , where is the castle of come - and - never - go ?
'' poor child ,' answered the dove , ' who has sent you on such a useless quest ?
'' my good or evil fortune ,' replied the boy , ' i know not which .
'' to get there ,' said the dove , ' you must follow the wind , which to - day is blowing towards the castle .
' the boy thanked her , and followed the wind , fearing all the time that it might change its direction and lead him astray .
but the wind seemed to feel pity for him and blew steadily on . with each step the country became more and more dreary , but at nightfall the child could see behind the dark and bare rocks something darker still .
this was the tower in which dwelt the witch ; and seizing the knocker he gave three loud knocks , which were echoed in the hollows of the rocks around . the door opened slowly , and there appeared on the threshold an old woman holding up a candle to her face , which was so hideous that the boy involuntarily stepped backwards , almost as frightened by the troop of lizards , beetles and such creatures that surrounded her , as by the woman herself .
' who are you who dare to knock at my door and wake me ?'
cried she .
' be quick and tell me what you want , or it will be the worse for you .
'' madam ,' answered the child , ' i believe that you alone know the way to the castle of come - and - never - go , and i pray you to show it to me .
'' very good ,' replied the witch , with something that she meant for a smile , ' but to - day it is late .
to - morrow you shall go .
now enter , and you shall sleep with my lizards .
'' i cannot stay ,' said he .
' i must go back at once , so as to reach the road from which i started before day dawns .
'' if i tell you , will you promise me that you will bring me this jar full of the many - coloured water from the spring in the court - yard of the castle ?'
asked she .
' if you fail to keep your word i will change you into a lizard for ever .
'' i promise ,' answered the boy . then the old woman called to a very thin dog , and said to him :' conduct this pig of a child to the castle of come - and - never - go , and take care that you warn my friend of his arrival .'
and the dog arose and shook itself , and set out . at the end of two hours they stopped in front of a large castle , big and black and gloomy , whose doors stood wide open , although neither sound nor light gave sign of any presence within .
the dog , however , seemed to know what to expect , and , after a wild howl , went on ; but the boy , who was uncertain whether this was the quarter of an hour when the giant was asleep , hesitated to follow him , and paused for a moment under a wild olive that grew near by , the only tree which he had beheld since he had parted from the dove .
' oh , heaven , help me !'
cried he .' cross !
cross !'
answered a voice . the boy leapt for joy as he recognised the note of the owl of which the swallow had spoken , and he said softly in the bird ' s language :' oh , wise owl , i pray you to protect and guide me , for i have come in search of the bird of truth .
and first i must fill this far with the many - coloured water in the courtyard of the castle .
'' do not do that ,' answered the owl , ' but fill the jar from the spring which bubbles close by the fountain with the many - coloured water .
afterwards , go into the aviary opposite the great door , but be careful not to touch any of the bright - plumaged birds contained in it , which will cry to you , each one , that he is the bird of truth .
choose only a small white bird that is hidden in a corner , which the others try incessantly to kill , not knowing that it cannot die .
and , be quick !-- for at this very moment the giant has fallen asleep , and you have only a quarter of an hour to do everything .
' the boy ran as fast as he could and entered the courtyard , where he saw the two spring close together .
he passed by the many - coloured water without casting a glance at it , and filled the jar from the fountain whose water was clear and pure .
he next hastened to the aviary , and was almost deafened by the clamour that rose as he shut the door behind him .
voices of peacocks , voices of ravens , voices of magpies , each claiming to be the bird of truth .
with steadfast face the boy walked by them all , to the corner , where , hemmed in by a hand of fierce crows , was the small white bird he sought .
putting her safely in his breast , he passed out , followed by the screams of the birds of bad faith which he left behind him . once outside , he ran without stopping to the witch ' s tower , and handed to the old woman the jar she had given him .
' become a parrot !'
cried she , flinging the water over him .
but instead of losing his shape , as so many had done before , he only grew ten times handsomer ; for the water was enchanted for good and not ill . then the creeping multitude around the witch hastened to roll themselves in the water , and stood up , human beings again . when the witch saw what was happening , she took a broomstick and flew away . who can guess the delight of the sister at the sight of her brother , bearing the bird of truth ?
but although the boy had accomplished much , something very difficult yet remained , and that was how to carry the bird of truth to the king without her being seized by the wicked courtiers , who would be ruined by the discovery of their plot . soon -- no one knew how -- the news spread abroad that the bird of truth was hovering round the palace , and the courtiers made all sorts of preparations to hinder her reaching the king . they got ready weapons that were sharpened , and weapons that were poisoned ; they sent for eagles and falcons to hunt her down , and constructed cages and boxes in which to shut her up if they were not able to kill her .
they declared that her white plumage was really put on to hide her black feathers -- in fact there was nothing they did not do in order to prevent the king from seeing the bird or from paying attention to her words if he did . as often happens in these cases , the courtiers brought about that which they feared .
they talked so much about the bird of truth that at last the king heard of it , and expressed a wish to see her .
the more difficulties that were put in his way the stronger grew his desire , and in the end the king published a proclamation that whoever found the bird of truth should bring her to him without delay . as soon as he saw this proclamation the boy called his sister , and they hastened to the palace .
the bird was buttoned inside his tunic , but , as might have been expected , the courtiers barred the way , and told the child that he could not enter .
it was in vain that the boy declared that he was only obeying the king ' s commands ; the courtiers only replied that his majesty was not yet out of bed , and it was forbidden to wake him . they were still talking , when , suddenly , the bird settled the question by flying upwards through an open window into the king ' s own room .
alighting on the pillow , close to the king ' s head , she bowed respectfully , and said :' my lord , i am the bird of truth whom you wished to see , and i have been obliged to approach you in the manner because the boy who brought me is kept out of the palace by your courtiers .
'' they shall pay for their insolence ,' said the king .
and he instantly ordered one of his attendants to conduct the boy at once to his apartments ; and in a moment more the prince entered , holding his sister by the hand .
' who are you ?'
asked the king ; ' and what has the bird of truth to do with you ?
'' if it please your majesty , the bird of truth will explain that herself ,' answered the boy . and the bird did explain ; and the king heard for the first time of the wicked plot that had been successful for so many years .
he took his children in his arms , with tears in his eyes , and hurried off with them to the tower in the mountains where the queen was shut up .
the poor woman was as white as marble , for she had been living almost in darkness ; but when she saw her husband and children , the colour came back to her face , and she was as beautiful as ever . they all returned in state to the city , where great rejoicings were held .
the wicked courtiers had their heads cut off , and all their property was taken away .
as for the good old couple , they were given riches and honour , and were loved and cherished to the end of their lives .
