once upon a time in the middle of winter , when the flakes of snow were falling like feathers from the sky , a queen sat at a window sewing , and the frame of the window was made of black ebony .
and whilst she was sewing and looking out of the window at the snow , she pricked her finger with the needle , and three drops of blood fell upon the snow .
and the red looked pretty upon the white snow , and she thought to herself , " would that i had a child as white as snow , as red as blood , and as black as the wood of the window - frame .
" soon after that she had a little daughter , who was as white as snow , and as red as blood , and her hair was as black as ebony ; and she was therefore called little snow - white .
and when the child was born , the queen died . after a year had passed the king took to himself another wife .
she was a beautiful woman , but proud and haughty , and she could not bear that anyone else should surpass her in beauty .
she had a wonderful looking - glass , and when she stood in front of it and looked at herself in it , and said --" looking - glass , looking - glass , on the wall , who in this land is the fairest of all ?
" the looking - glass answered --" thou , o queen , art the fairest of all !
" then she was satisfied , for she knew that the looking - glass spoke the truth . but snow - white was growing up , and grew more and more beautiful ; and when she was seven years old she was as beautiful as the day , and more beautiful than the queen herself .
and once when the queen asked her looking - glass --" looking - glass , looking - glass , on the wall , who in this land is the fairest of all ?"
it answered --" thou art fairer than all who are here , lady queen .
" but more beautiful still is snow - white , as i ween .
" then the queen was shocked , and turned yellow and green with envy .
from that hour , whenever she looked at snow - white , her heart heaved in her breast , she hated the girl so much . and envy and pride grew higher and higher in her heart like a weed , so that she had no peace day or night .
she called a huntsman , and said , " take the child away into the forest ; i will no longer have her in my sight .
kill her , and bring me back her heart as a token ."
the huntsman obeyed , and took her away ; but when he had drawn his knife , and was about to pierce snow - white ' s innocent heart , she began to weep , and said , " ah dear huntsman , leave me my life !
i will run away into the wild forest , and never come home again .
" and as she was so beautiful the huntsman had pity on her and said , " run away , then , you poor child ."
" the wild beasts will soon have devoured you ," thought he , and yet it seemed as if a stone had been rolled from his heart since it was no longer needful for him to kill her .
and as a young boar just then came running by he stabbed it , and cut out its heart and took it to the queen as proof that the child was dead .
the cook had to salt this , and the wicked queen ate it , and thought she had eaten the heart of snow - white . but now the poor child was all alone in the great forest , and so terrified that she looked at every leaf of every tree , and did not know what to do .
then she began to run , and ran over sharp stones and through thorns , and the wild beasts ran past her , but did her no harm . she ran as long as her feet would go until it was almost evening ; then she saw a little cottage and went into it to rest herself .
everything in the cottage was small , but neater and cleaner than can be told .
there was a table on which was a white cover , and seven little plates , and on each plate a little spoon ; moreover , there were seven little knives and forks , and seven little mugs .
against the wall stood seven little beds side by side , and covered with snow - white counterpanes . little snow - white was so hungry and thirsty that she ate some vegetables and bread from each plate and drank a drop of wine out of each mug , for she did not wish to take all from one only .
then , as she was so tired , she laid herself down on one of the little beds , but none of them suited her ; one was too long , another too short , but at last she found that the seventh one was right , and so she remained in it , said a prayer and went to sleep . when it was quite dark the owners of the cottage came back ; they were seven dwarfs who dug and delved in the mountains for ore .
they lit their seven candles , and as it was now light within the cottage they saw that someone had been there , for everything was not in the same order in which they had left it . the first said , " who has been sitting on my chair ?
" the second , " who has been eating off my plate ?
" the third , " who has been taking some of my bread ?
" the fourth , " who has been eating my vegetables ?
" the fifth , " who has been using my fork ?
" the sixth , " who has been cutting with my knife ?
" the seventh , " who has been drinking out of my mug ?
" then the first looked round and saw that there was a little hole on his bed , and he said , " who has been getting into my bed ?"
the others came up and each called out , " somebody has been lying in my bed too ."
but the seventh when he looked at his bed saw little snow - white , who was lying asleep therein .
and he called the others , who came running up , and they cried out with astonishment , and brought their seven little candles and let the light fall on little snow - white .
" oh , heavens !
oh , heavens !"
cried they , " what a lovely child !"
and they were so glad that they did not wake her up , but let her sleep on in the bed .
and the seventh dwarf slept with his companions , one hour with each , and so got through the night . when it was morning little snow - white awoke , and was frightened when she saw the seven dwarfs .
but they were friendly and asked her what her name was .
" my name is snow - white ," she answered .
" how have you come to our house ?"
said the dwarfs .
then she told them that her step - mother had wished to have her killed , but that the huntsman had spared her life , and that she had run for the whole day , until at last she had found their dwelling .
the dwarfs said , " if you will take care of our house , cook , make the beds , wash , sew , and knit , and if you will keep everything neat and clean , you can stay with us and you shall want for nothing ."
" yes ," said snow - white , " with all my heart ," and she stayed with them .
she kept the house in order for them ; in the mornings they went to the mountains and looked for copper and gold , in the evenings they came back , and then their supper had to be ready .
the girl was alone the whole day , so the good dwarfs warned her and said , " beware of your step - mother , she will soon know that you are here ; be sure to let no one come in .
" but the queen , believing that she had eaten snow - white ' s heart , could not but think that she was again the first and most beautiful of all ; and she went to her looking - glass and said --" looking - glass , looking - glass , on the wall , who in this land is the fairest of all ?
" and the glass answered --" oh , queen , thou art fairest of all i see , but over the hills , where the seven dwarfs dwell , snow - white is still alive and well , and none is so fair as she .
" then she was astounded , for she knew that the looking - glass never spoke falsely , and she knew that the huntsman had betrayed her , and that little snow - white was still alive . and so she thought and thought again how she might kill her , for so long as she was not the fairest in the whole land , envy let her have no rest .
and when she had at last thought of something to do , she painted her face , and dressed herself like an old pedler - woman , and no one could have known her .
in this disguise she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs , and knocked at the door and cried , " pretty things to sell , very cheap , very cheap ."
little snow - white looked out of the window and called out , " good - day my good woman , what have you to sell ?"
" good things , pretty things ," she answered ; " stay - laces of all colours ," and she pulled out one which was woven of bright - coloured silk .
" i may let the worthy old woman in ," thought snow - white , and she unbolted the door and bought the pretty laces .
" child ," said the old woman , " what a fright you look ; come , i will lace you properly for once ."
snow - white had no suspicion , but stood before her , and let herself be laced with the new laces .
but the old woman laced so quickly and so tightly that snow - white lost her breath and fell down as if dead .
" now i am the most beautiful ," said the queen to herself , and ran away . not long afterwards , in the evening , the seven dwarfs came home , but how shocked they were when they saw their dear little snow - white lying on the ground , and that she neither stirred nor moved , and seemed to be dead .
they lifted her up , and , as they saw that she was laced too tightly , they cut the laces ; then she began to breathe a little , and after a while came to life again .
when the dwarfs heard what had happened they said , " the old pedler - woman was no one else than the wicked queen ; take care and let no one come in when we are not with you .
" but the wicked woman when she had reached home went in front of the glass and asked --" looking - glass , looking - glass , on the wall , who in this land is the fairest of all ?
" and it answered as before --" oh , queen , thou art fairest of all i see , but over the hills , where the seven dwarfs dwell , snow - white is still alive and well , and none is so fair as she .
" when she heard that , all her blood rushed to her heart with fear , for she saw plainly that little snow - white was again alive .
" but now ," she said , " i will think of something that shall put an end to you ," and by the help of witchcraft , which she understood , she made a poisonous comb .
then she disguised herself and took the shape of another old woman .
so she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs , knocked at the door , and cried , " good things to sell , cheap , cheap !"
little snow - white looked out and said , " go away ; i cannot let any one come in ."
" i suppose you can look ," said the old woman , and pulled the poisonous comb out and held it up .
it pleased the girl so well that she let herself be beguiled , and opened the door .
when they had made a bargain the old woman said , " now i will comb you properly for once ."
poor little snow - white had no suspicion , and let the old woman do as she pleased , but hardly had she put the comb in her hair than the poison in it took effect , and the girl fell down senseless .
" you paragon of beauty ," said the wicked woman , " you are done for now ," and she went away . but fortunately it was almost evening , when the seven dwarfs came home .
when they saw snow - white lying as if dead upon the ground they at once suspected the step - mother , and they looked and found the poisoned comb .
scarcely had they taken it out when snow - white came to herself , and told them what had happened .
then they warned her once more to be upon her guard and to open the door to no one . the queen , at home , went in front of the glass and said --" looking - glass , looking - glass , on the wall , who in this land is the fairest of all ?
" then it answered as before --" oh , queen , thou art fairest of all i see , but over the hills , where the seven dwarfs dwell , snow - white is still alive and well , and none is so fair as she .
" when she heard the glass speak thus she trembled and shook with rage .
" snow - white shall die ," she cried , " even if it costs me my life !
" thereupon she went into a quite secret , lonely room , where no one ever came , and there she made a very poisonous apple .
outside it looked pretty , white with a red cheek , so that everyone who saw it longed for it ; but whoever ate a piece of it must surely die . when the apple was ready she painted her face , and dressed herself up as a country - woman , and so she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs .
she knocked at the door .
snow - white put her head out of the window and said , " i cannot let any one in ; the seven dwarfs have forbidden me ."
" it is all the same to me ," answered the woman , " i shall soon get rid of my apples .
there , i will give you one .
"" no ," said snow - white , " i dare not take anything ."
" are you afraid of poison ?"
said the old woman ; " look , i will cut the apple in two pieces ; you eat the red cheek , and i will eat the white ."
the apple was so cunningly made that only the red cheek was poisoned .
snow - white longed for the fine apple , and when she saw that the woman ate part of it she could resist no longer , and stretched out her hand and took the poisonous half .
but hardly had she a bit of it in her mouth than she fell down dead .
then the queen looked at her with a dreadful look , and laughed aloud and said , " white as snow , red as blood , black as ebony - wood !
this time the dwarfs cannot wake you up again .
" and when she asked of the looking - glass at home --" looking - glass , looking - glass , on the wall , who in this land is the fairest of all ?
" it answered at last --" oh , queen , in this land thou art fairest of all .
" then her envious heart had rest , so far as an envious heart can have rest . the dwarfs , when they came home in the evening , found snow - white lying upon the ground ; she breathed no longer and was dead .
they lifted her up , looked to see whether they could find anything poisonous , unlaced her , combed her hair , washed her with water and wine , but it was all of no use ; the poor child was dead , and remained dead .
they laid her upon a bier , and all seven of them sat round it and wept for her , and wept three days long . then they were going to bury her , but she still looked as if she were living , and still had her pretty red cheeks .
they said , " we could not bury her in the dark ground ," and they had a transparent coffin of glass made , so that she could be seen from all sides , and they laid her in it , and wrote her name upon it in golden letters , and that she was a king ' s daughter .
then they put the coffin out upon the mountain , and one of them always stayed by it and watched it .
and birds came too , and wept for snow - white ; first an owl , then a raven , and last a dove . and now snow - white lay a long , long time in the coffin , and she did not change , but looked as if she were asleep ; for she was as white as snow , as red as blood , and her hair was as black as ebony . it happened , however , that a king ' s son came into the forest , and went to the dwarfs ' house to spend the night .
he saw the coffin on the mountain , and the beautiful snow - white within it , and read what was written upon it in golden letters .
then he said to the dwarfs , " let me have the coffin , i will give you whatever you want for it ."
but the dwarfs answered , " we will not part with it for all the gold in the world ."
then he said , " let me have it as a gift , for i cannot live without seeing snow - white .
i will honour and prize her as my dearest possession ."
as he spoke in this way the good dwarfs took pity upon him , and gave him the coffin . and now the king ' s son had it carried away by his servants on their shoulders .
and it happened that they stumbled over a tree - stump , and with the shock the poisonous piece of apple which snow - white had bitten off came out of her throat .
and before long she opened her eyes , lifted up the lid of the coffin , sat up , and was once more alive .
" oh , heavens , where am i ?"
she cried .
the king ' s son , full of joy , said , " you are with me ," and told her what had happened , and said , " i love you more than everything in the world ; come with me to my father ' s palace , you shall be my wife .
" and snow - white was willing , and went with him , and their wedding was held with great show and splendour .
but snow - white ' s wicked step - mother was also bidden to the feast .
when she had arrayed herself in beautiful clothes she went before the looking - glass , and said --" looking - glass , looking - glass , on the wall , who in this land is the fairest of all ?
" the glass answered --" oh , queen , of all here the fairest art thou , but the young queen is fairer by far as i trow .
" then the wicked woman uttered a curse , and was so wretched , so utterly wretched , that she knew not what to do .
at first she would not go to the wedding at all , but she had no peace , and must go to see the young queen .
and when she went in she knew snow - white ; and she stood still with rage and fear , and could not stir .
but iron slippers had already been put upon the fire , and they were brought in with tongs , and set before her .
then she was forced to put on the red - hot shoes , and dance until she dropped down dead .
