there were once a cock and a hen who wanted to take a journey together .
so the cock built a beautiful carriage , which had four red wheels , and harnessed four mice to it .
the hen seated herself in it with the cock , and they drove away together .
not long afterwards they met a cat who said , " where are you going ?"
the cock replied , " we are going to the house of herr korbes ."
- " take me with you ," said the cat .
the cock answered , " most willingly , get up behind , lest you fall off in front .
take great care not to dirty my little red wheels .
and you little wheels , roll on , and you little mice pipe out , as we go forth on our way to the house of herr korbes .
" after this came a millstone , then an egg , then a duck , then a pin , and at last a needle , who all seated themselves in the carriage , and drove with them .
when , however , they reached the house of herr korbes , herr korbes was not there .
the mice drew the carriage into the barn , the hen flew with the cock upon a perch .
the cat sat down by the hearth , the duck on the well - pole .
the egg rolled itself into a towel , the pin stuck itself into the chair - cushion , the needle jumped on to the bed in the middle of the pillow , and the millstone laid itself over the door .
then herr korbes came home , went to the hearth , and was about to light the fire , when the cat threw a quantity of ashes in his face .
he ran into the kitchen in a great hurry to wash it off , and the duck splashed some water in his face .
he wanted to dry it with the towel , but the egg rolled up against him , broke , and glued up his eyes .
he wanted to rest , and sat down in the chair , and then the pin pricked him .
he fell in a passion , and threw himself on his bed , but as soon as he laid his head on the pillow , the needle pricked him , so that he screamed aloud , and was just going to run out into the wide world in his rage , but when he came to the house - door , the millstone leapt down and struck him dead .
herr korbes must have been a very wicked man !
