once on a time there lived a king who was immensely rich .
he had broad lands , and sacks overflowing with gold and silver ; but he did not care a bit for all his riches , because the queen , his wife , was dead .
he shut himself up in a little room and knocked his head against the walls for grief , till his courtiers were really afraid that he would hurt himself .
so they hung feather - beds between the tapestry and the walls , and then he could go on knocking his head as long as it was any consolation to him without coming to much harm .
all his subjects came to see him , and said whatever they thought would comfort him : some were grave , even gloomy with him ; and some agreeable , even gay ; but not one could make the least impression on him .
indeed , he hardly seemed to hear what they said .
at last came a lady who was wrapped in a black mantle , and seemed to be in the deepest grief .
she wept and sobbed till even the king ' s attention was attracted ; and when she said that , far from coming to try and diminish his grief , she , who had just lost a good husband , was come to add her tears to his , since she knew what he must be feeling , the king redoubled his lamentations .
then he told the sorrowful lady long stories about the good qualities of his departed queen , and she in her turn recounted all the virtues of her departed husband ; and this passed the time so agreeably that the king quite forgot to thump his head against the feather - beds , and the lady did not need to wipe the tears from her great blue eyes as often as before .
by degrees they came to talking about other things in which the king took an interest , and in a wonderfully short time the whole kingdom was astonished by the news that the king was married again to the sorrowful lady . now the king had one daughter , who was just fifteen years old .
her name was fiordelisa , and she was the prettiest and most charming princess imaginable , always gay and merry .
the new queen , who also had a daughter , very soon sent for her to come to the palace .
turritella , for that was her name , had been brought up by her godmother , the fairy mazilla , but in spite of all the care bestowed on her , she was neither beautiful nor gracious .
indeed , when the queen saw how ill - tempered and ugly she appeared beside fiordelisa she was in despair , and did everything in her power to turn the king against his own daughter , in the hope that he might take a fancy to turritella .
one day the king said that it was time fiordelisa and turritella were married , so he would give one of them to the first suitable prince who visited his court .
the queen answered :' my daughter certainly ought to be the first to be married ; she is older than yours , and a thousand times more charming !
' the king , who hated disputes , said , ' very well , it ' s no affair of mine , settle it your own way .
' very soon after came the news that king charming , who was the most handsome and magnificent prince in all the country round , was on his way to visit the king .
as soon as the queen heard this , she set all her jewellers , tailors , weavers , and embroiderers to work on splendid dresses and ornaments for turritella , but she told the king that fiordelisa had no need of anything new , and the night before the king was to arrive , she bribed her waiting woman to steal away all the princess ' s own dresses and jewels , so that when the day came , and fiordelisa wished to adorn herself as became her high rank , not even a ribbon could she find . however , as she easily guessed who had played her such a trick , she made no complaint , but sent to the merchants for some rich stuffs .
but they said that the queen had expressly forbidden them to supply her with any , and they dared not disobey .
so the princess had nothing left to put on but the little white frock she had been wearing the day before ; and dressed in that , she went down when the time of the king ' s arrival came , and sat in a corner hoping to escape notice .
the queen received her guest with great ceremony , and presented him to her daughter , who was gorgeously attired , but so much splendour only made her ugliness more noticeable , and the king , after one glance at her , looked the other way .
the queen , however , only thought that he was bashful , and took pains to keep turritella in full view .
king charming then asked it there was not another princess , called fiordelisa .
' yes ,' said turritella , pointing with her finger , ' there she is , trying to keep out of sight because she is not smart .
' at this fiordelisa blushed , and looked so shy and so lovely , that the king was fairly astonished .
he rose , and bowing low before her , said —' madam , your incomparable beauty needs no adornment .
'' sire ,' answered the princess , ' i assure you that i am not in the habit of wearing dresses as crumpled and untidy as this one , so i should have been better pleased if you had not seen me at all .'' impossible !'
cried king charming .
' wherever such a marvellously beautiful princess appears i can look at nothing else .
' here the queen broke in , saying sharply —' i assure you , sire , that fiordelisa is vain enough already .
pray make her no more flattering speeches .
' the king quite understood that she was not pleased , but that did not matter to him , so he admired fiordelisa to his heart ' s content , and talked to her for three hours without stopping . the queen was in despair , and so was turritella , when they saw how much the king preferred fiordelisa .
they complained bitterly to the king , and begged and teased him , till he at last consented to have the princess shut up somewhere out of sight while king charming ' s visit lasted .
so that night , as she went to her room , she was seized by four masked figures , and carried up into the topmost room of a high tower , where they left her in the deepest dejection .
she easily guessed that she was to be kept out of sight for fear the king should fall in love with her ; but then , how disappointing that was , for she already liked him very much , and would have been quite willing to be chosen for his bride !
as king charming did not know what had happened to the princess , he looked forward impatiently to meeting her again , and he tried to talk about her with the courtiers who were placed in attendance on him .
but by the queen ' s orders they would say nothing good of her , but declared that she was vain , capricious , and bad - tempered ; that she tormented her waiting - maids , and that , in spite of all the money that the king gave her , she was so mean that she preferred to go about dressed like a poor shepherdess , rather than spend any of it .
all these things vexed the king very much , and he was silent .
' it is true ,' thought he , ' that she was very poorly dressed , but then she was so ashamed that it proves that she was not accustomed to be so .
i cannot believe that with that lovely face she can be as ill - tempered and contemptible as they say .
no , no , the queen must be jealous of her for the sake of that ugly daughter of hers , and so these evil reports are spread .
' the courtiers could not help seeing that what they had told the king did not please him , and one of them cunningly began to praise fiordelisa , when he could talk to the king without being heard by the others . king charming thereupon became so cheerful , and interested in all he said , that it was easy to guess how much he admired the princess .
so when the queen sent for the courtiers and questioned them about all they had found out , their report confirmed her worst fears .
as to the poor princess fiordelisa , she cried all night without stopping .
' it would have been quite bad enough to be shut up in this gloomy tower before i had ever seen king charming ,' she said ; ' but now when he is here , and they are all enjoying themselves with him , it is too unkind .
' the next day the queen sent king charming splendid presents of jewels and rich stuffs , and among other things an ornament made expressly in honour of the approaching wedding .
it was a heart cut out of one huge ruby , and was surrounded by several diamond arrows , and pierced by one .
a golden true - lover ' s knot above the heart bore the motto , ' but one can wound me ,' and the whole jewel was hung on a chain of immense pearls .
never , since the world has been a world , had such a thing been made , and the king was quite amazed when it was presented to him .
the page who brought it begged him to accept it from the princess , who chose him to be her knight .' what !'
cried he , ' does the lovely princess fiordelisa deign to think of me in this amiable and encouraging way ?
'' you confuse the names , sire ,' said the page hastily .
' i come on behalf of the princess turritella .
'' oh , it is turritella who wishes me to be her knight ,' said the king coldly .
' i am sorry that i cannot accept the honour .'
and he sent the splendid gifts back to the queen and turritella , who were furiously angry at the contempt with which they were treated .
as soon as he possibly could , king charming went to see the king and queen , and as he entered the hall he looked for fiordelisa , and every time anyone came in he started round to see who it was , and was altogether so uneasy and dissatisfied that the queen saw it plainly .
but she would not take any notice , and talked of nothing but the entertainments she was planning .
the prince answered at random , and presently asked if he was not to have the pleasure of seeing the princess fiordelisa .
' sire ,' answered the queen haughtily , ' her father has ordered that she shall not leave her own apartments till my daughter is married .
'' what can be the reason for keeping that lovely princess a prisoner ?'
cried the king in great indignation .
' that i do not know ,' answered the queen ; ' and even if i did , i might not feel bound to tell you .
' the king was terribly angry at being thwarted like this .
he felt certain that turritella was to blame for it , so casting a furious glance at her he abruptly took leave of the queen , and returned to his own apartments .
there he said to a young squire whom he had brought with him : ' i would give all i have in the world to gain the good will of one of the princess ' s waiting - women , and obtain a moment ' s speech with fiordelisa .
'' nothing could be easier ,' said the young squire ; and he very soon made friends with one of the ladies , who told him that in the evening fiordelisa would be at a little window which looked into the garden , where he could come and talk to her .
only , she said , he must take very great care not to be seen , as it would be as much as her place was worth to be caught helping king charming to see the princess .
the squire was delighted , and promised all she asked ; but the moment he had run off to announce his success to the king , the false waiting - woman went and told the queen all that had passed .
she at once determined that her own daughter should be at the little window ; and she taught her so well all she was to say and do , that even the stupid turritella could make no mistake . the night was so dark that the king had not a chance of finding out the trick that was being played on him , so he approached the window with the greatest delight , and said everything that he had been longing to say to fiordelisa to persuade her of his love for her .
turritella answered as she had been taught , that she was very unhappy , and that there was no chance of her being better treated by the queen till her daughter was married .
and then the king entreated her to marry him ; and thereupon he drew his ring from his finger and put it on turritella ' s , and she answered him as well as she could .
the king could not help thinking that she did not say exactly what he would have expected from his darling fiordelisa , but he persuaded himself that the fear of being surprised by the queen was making her awkward and unnatural .
he would not leave her till she had promised to see him again the next night , which turritella did willingly enough .
the queen was overjoyed at the success of her stratagem , end promised herself that all would now be as she wished ; and sure enough , as soon as it was dark the following night the king came , bringing with him a chariot which had been given him by an enchanter who was his friend .
this chariot was drawn by flying frogs , and the king easily persuaded turritella to come out and let him put her into it , then mounting beside her he cried triumphantly —' now , my princess , you are free ; where will it please you that we shall hold our wedding ?
' and turritella , with her head muffled in her mantle , answered that the fairy mazilla was her godmother , and that she would like it to be at her castle .
so the king told the frogs , who had the map of the whole world in their heads , and very soon he and turritella were set down at the castle of the fairy mazilla .
the king would certainly have found out his mistake the moment they stepped into the brilliantly lighted castle , but turritella held her mantle more closely round her , and asked to see the fairy by herself , and quickly told her all that had happened , and how she had succeeded in deceiving king charming .' oho !
my daughter ,' said the fairy , ' i see we have no easy task before us .
he loves fiordelisa so much that he will not be easily pacified .
i feel sure he will defy us !'
meanwhile the king was waiting in a splendid room with diamond walls , so clear that he could see the fairy and turritella as they stood whispering together , and he was very much puzzled .
' who can have betrayed us ?'
he said to himself .
' how comes our enemy here ?
she must be plotting to prevent our marriage .
why doesn ' t my lovely fiordelisa make haste and come hack to me ?
' but it was worse than anything he had imagined when the fairy mazilla entered , leading turritella by the hand , and said to him —' king charming , here is the princess turritella to whom you have plighted your faith .
let us have the wedding at once .'' i !'
cried the king .
' i marry that little creature !
what do you take me for ?
i have promised her nothing !
'' say no more .
have you no respect for a fairy ?'
cried she angrily .
' yes , madam ,' answered the king , ' i am prepared to respect you as much as a fairy can be respected , if you will give me back my princess .
'' am i not here ?'
interrupted turritella .
' here is the ring you gave me .
with whom did you talk at the little window , if it was not with me ?'' what !'
cried the king angrily , ' have i been altogether deceived and deluded ?
where is my chariot ?
not another moment will i stay here .
'' oho ,' said the fairy , ' not so fast .'
and she touched his feet , which instantly became as firmly fixed to the floor as if they had been nailed there .' oh !
do whatever you like with me ,' said the king ; ' you may turn me to stone , but i will marry no one but fiordelisa .
' and not another word would he say , though the fairy scolded and threatened , and turritella wept and raged for twenty days and twenty nights .
at last the fairy mazilla said furiously ( for she was quite tired out by his obstinacy ), ' choose whether you will marry my goddaughter , or do penance seven years for breaking your word to her .
' and then the king cried gaily : ' pray do whatever you like with me , as long as you deliver me from this ugly scold !'' scold !'
cried turritella angrily .
' who are you , i should like to know , that you dare to call me a scold ?
a miserable king who breaks his word , and goes about in a chariot drawn by croaking frogs out of a marsh !
'' let us have no more of these insults ,' cried the fairy .
' fly from that window , ungrateful king , and for seven years be a blue bird .'
as she spoke the king ' s face altered , his arms turned to wings , his feet to little crooked black claws .
in a moment he had a slender body like a bird , covered with shining blue feathers , his beak was like ivory , his eyes were bright as stars , and a crown of white feathers adorned his head . as soon as the transformation was complete the king uttered a dolorous cry and fled through the open window , pursued by the mocking laughter of turritella and the fairy mazilla .
he flew on till he reached the thickest part of the wood , and there , perched on a cypress tree , he bewailed his miserable fate .
' alas !
in seven years who knows what may happen to my darling fiordelisa !'
he said .
' her cruel stepmother may have married her to someone else before i am myself again , and then what good will life be to me ?
' in the meantime the fairy mazilla had sent turritella back to the queen , who was all anxiety to know how the wedding , had gone off .
but when her daughter arrived and told her all that had happened she was terribly angry , and of course all her wrath fell on fiordelisa .
' she shall have cause to repent that the king admires her ,' said the queen , nodding her head meaningly , and then she and turritella went up to the little room in the tower where the princess was imprisoned .
fiordelisa was immensely surprised to see that turritella was wearing a royal mantle and a diamond crown , and her heart sank when the queen said : ' my daughter is come to show you some of her wedding presents , for she is king charming ' s bride , and they are the happiest pair in the world , he loves her to distraction .'
all this time turritella was spreading out lace , and jewels , and rich brocades , and ribbons before fiordelisa ' s unwilling eyes , and taking good care to display king charming ' s ring , which she wore on her thumb .
the princess recognised it as soon as her eyes fell on it , and after that she could no longer doubt that he had indeed married turritella .
in despair she cried , ' take away these miserable gauds !
what pleasure has a wretched captive in the sight of them ?'
and then she fell insensible on the floor , and the cruel queen laughed maliciously , and went away with turritella , leaving her there without comfort or aid .
that night the queen said to the king , that his daughter was so infatuated with king charming , in spite of his never having shown any preference for her , that it was just as well she should stay in the tower till she came to her senses .
to which he answered that it was her affair , and she could give what orders she pleased about the princess . when the unhappy fiordelisa recovered , and remembered all she had just heard , she began to cry bitterly , believing that king charming was lost to her for ever , and all night long she sat at her open window sighing and lamenting ; but when it was dawn she crept away into the darkest corner of her little room and sat there , too unhappy to care about anything .
as soon as night came again she once more leaned out into the darkness and bewailed her miserable lot . now it happened that king charming , or rather the blue bird , had been flying round the palace in the hope of seeing his beloved princess , but had not dared to go too near the windows for fear of being seen and recognised by turritella .
when night fell he had not succeeded in discovering where fiordelisa was imprisoned , and , weary and sad , he perched on a branch of a tall fir tree which grew close to the tower , and began to sing himself to sleep .
but soon the sound of a soft voice lamenting attracted his attention , and listening intently he heard it say —' ah !
cruel queen !
what have i ever done to be imprisoned like this ?
and was i not unhappy enough before , that you must needs come and taunt me with the happiness your daughter is enjoying now she is king charming ' s bride ?
' the blue bird , greatly surprised , waited impatiently for the dawn , and the moment it was light flew off to see who it could have been who spoke thus .
but he found the window shut , and could see no one .
the next night , however , he was on the watch , and by the clear moonlight he saw that the sorrowful lady at the window was fiordelisa herself .
' my princess !
have i found you at last ?'
said he , alighting close to her .
' who is speaking to me ?'
cried the princess in great surprise .
' only a moment since you mentioned my name , and now you do not know me , fiordelisa ,' said he sadly .
' but no wonder , since i am nothing but a blue bird , and must remain one for seven years .'' what !
little blue bird , are you really the powerful king charming ?'
said the princess , caressing him .
' it is too true ,' he answered .
' for being faithful to you i am thus punished .
but believe me , if it were for twice as long i would bear it joyfully rather than give you up .'' oh !
what are you telling me ?'
cried the princess .
' has not your bride , turritella , just visited me , wearing the royal mantle and the diamond crown you gave her ?
i cannot be mistaken , for i saw your ring on her thumb .
' then the blue bird was furiously angry , and told the princess all that had happened , how he had been deceived into carrying off turritella , and how , for refusing to marry her , the fairy mazilla had condemned him to be a blue bird for seven years . the princess was very happy when she heard how faithful her lover was , and would never have tired of hearing his loving speeches and explanations , but too soon the sun rose , and they had to part lest the blue bird should be discovered .
after promising to come again to the princess ' s window as soon as it was dark , he flew away , and hid himself in a little hole in the fir - tree , while fiordelisa remained devoured by anxiety lest he should be caught in a trap , or eaten up by an eagle . but the blue bird did not long stay in his hiding - place .
he flew away , and away , till he came to his own palace , and got into it through a broken window , and there he found the cabinet where his jewels were kept , and chose out a splendid diamond ring as a present for the princess .
by the time he got back , fiordelisa was sitting waiting for him by the open window , and when he gave her the ring , she scolded him gently for having run such a risk to get it for her .
' promise me that you will wear it always !'
said the blue bird .
and the princess promised on condition that he should come and see her in the day as well as by night .
they talked all night long , and the next morning the blue bird flew off to his kingdom , and crept into his palace through the broken window , and chose from his treasures two bracelets , each cut out of a single emerald .
when he presented them to the princess , she shook her head at him reproachfully , saying —' do you think i love you so little that i need all these gifts to remind me of you ?
' and he answered —' no , my princess ; but i love you so much that i feel i cannot express it , try as i may .
i only bring you these worthless trifles to show that i have not ceased to think of you , though i have been obliged to leave you for a time .'
the following night he gave fiordelisa a watch set in a single pearl .
the princess laughed a little when she saw it , and said —' you may well give me a watch , for since i have known you i have lost the power of measuring time .
the hours you spend with me pass like minutes , and the hours that i drag through without you seem years to me .
'' ah , princess , they cannot seem so long to you as they do to me !'
he answered .
day by day he brought more beautiful things for the princess — diamonds , and rubies , and opals ; and at night she decked herself with them to please him , but by day she hid them in her straw mattress .
when the sun shone the blue bird , hidden in the tall fir - tree , sang to her so sweetly that all the passersby wondered , and said that the wood was inhabited by a spirit .
and so two years slipped away , and still the princess was a prisoner , and turritella was not married .
the queen had offered her hand to all the neighbouring princes , but they always answered that they would marry fiordelisa with pleasure , but not turritella on any account .
this displeased the queen terribly .
' fiordelisa must be in league with them , to annoy me !'
she said .
' let us go and accuse her of it .
' so she and turritella went up into the tower .
now it happened that it was nearly midnight , and fiordelisa , all decked with jewels , was sitting at the window with the blue bird , and as the queen paused outside the door to listen she heard the princess and her lover singing together a little song he had just taught her .
these were the words :' oh !
what a luckless pair are we , one in a prison , and one in a tree .
all our trouble and anguish came from our faithfulness spoiling our enemies ' game .
but vainly they practice their cruel arts , for nought can sever our two fond hearts .
' they sound melancholy perhaps , but the two voices sang them gaily enough , and the queen burst open the door , crying , ' ah !
my turritella , there is some treachery going on here !
' as soon as she saw her , fiordelisa , with great presence of mind , hastily shut her little window , that the blue bird might have time to escape , and then turned to meet the queen , who overwhelmed her with a torrent of reproaches .
' your intrigues are discovered , madam ,' she said furiously ; ' and you need not hope that your high rank will save you from the punishment you deserve .
'' and with whom do you accuse me of intriguing , madam ?'
said the princess .
' have i not been your prisoner these two years , and who have i seen except the gaolers sent by you ?
' while she spoke the queen and turritella were looking at her in the greatest surprise , perfectly dazzled by her beauty and the splendour of her jewels , and the queen said :' if one may ask , madam , where did you get all these diamonds ?
perhaps you mean to tell me that you have discovered a mine of them in the tower !
'' i certainly did find them here ,' answered the princess .
' and pray ,' said the queen , her wrath increasing every moment , ' for whose admiration are you decked out like this , since i have often seen you not half as fine on the most important occasions at court ?
'' for my own ,' answered fiordelisa .
' you must admit that i have had plenty of time on my hands , so you cannot be surprised at my spending some of it in making myself smart .
'' that ' s all very fine ,' said the queen suspiciously .
' i think i will look about , and see for myself .
' so she and turritella began to search every corner of the little room , and when they came to the straw mattress out fell such a quantity of pearls , diamonds , rubies , opals , emeralds , and sapphires , that they were amazed , and could not tell what to think .
but the queen resolved to hide somewhere a packet of false letters to prove that the princess had been conspiring with the king ' s enemies , and she chose the chimney as a good place .
fortunately for fiordelisa this was exactly where the blue bird had perched himself , to keep an eye on her proceedings , and try to avert danger from his beloved princess , and now he cried :' beware , fiordelisa !
your false enemy is plotting against you .
' this strange voice so frightened the queen that she took the letter and went away hastily with turritella , and they held a council to try and devise some means of finding out what fairy or enchanter was favouring the princess .
at last they sent one of the queen ' s maids to wait on fiordelisa , and told her to pretend to be quite stupid , and to see and hear nothing , while she was really to watch the princess day and night , and keep the queen informed of all her doings . poor fiordelisa , who guessed she was sent as a spy , was in despair , and cried bitterly that she dared not see her dear blue bird for fear that some evil might happen to him if he were discovered . the days were so long , and the nights so dull , but for a whole month she never went near her little window lest he should fly to her as he used to do . however , at last the spy , who had never taken her eyes off the princess day or night , was so overcome with weariness that she fell into a deep sleep , and as son as the princess saw that , she flew to open her window and cried softly :' blue bird , blue as the sky , fly to me now , there ' s nobody by .
' and the blue bird , who had never ceased to flutter round within sight and hearing of her prison , came in an instant .
they had so much to say , and were so overjoyed to meet once more , that it scarcely seemed to them five minutes before the sun rose , and the blue bird had to fly away . but the next night the spy slept as soundly as before , so that the blue bird came , and he and the princess began to think they were perfectly safe , and to make all sorts of plans for being happy as they were before the queen ' s visit .
but , alas !
the third night the spy was not quite so sleepy , and when the princess opened her window and cried as usual :' blue bird , blue as the sky , fly to me now , there ' s nobody nigh ,' she was wide awake in a moment , though she was sly enough to keep her eyes shut at first .
but presently she heard voices , and peeping cautiously , she saw by the moonlight the most lovely blue bird in the world , who was talking to the princess , while she stroked and caressed it fondly . the spy did not lose a single word of the conversation , and as soon as the day dawned , and the blue bird had reluctantly said good - bye to the princess , she rushed off to the queen , and told her all she had seen and heard . then the queen sent for turritella , and they talked it over , and very soon came to the conclusion than this blue bird was no other than king charming himself .' ah !
that insolent princess !'
cried the queen .
' to think that when we supposed her to be so miserable , she was all the while as happy as possible with that false king .
but i know how we can avenge ourselves !
' so the spy was ordered to go back and pretend to sleep as soundly as ever , and indeed she went to bed earlier than usual , and snored as naturally as possible , and the poor princess ran to the window and cried :' blue bird , blue as the sky , fly to me now , there ' s nobody by !
' but no bird came .
all night long she called , and waited , and listened , but still there was no answer , for the cruel queen had caused the fir tree to be hung all over with knives , swords , razors , shears , bill - hooks , and sickles , so that when the blue bird heard the princess call , and flew towards her , his wings were cut , and his little black feet clipped off , and all pierced and stabbed in twenty places , he fell back bleeding into his hiding place in the tree , and lay there groaning and despairing , for he thought the princess must have been persuaded to betray him , to regain her liberty .' ah !
fiordelisa , can you indeed be so lovely and so faithless ?'
he sighed , ' then i may as well die at once !'
and he turned over on his side and began to die .
but it happened that his friend the enchanter had been very much alarmed at seeing the frog chariot come back to him without king charming , and had been round the world eight times seeking him , but without success .
at the very moment when the king gave himself up to despair , he was passing through the wood for the eighth time , and called , as he had done all over the world :' charming !
king charming !
are you here ?
' the king at once recognised his friend ' s voice , and answered very faintly :' i am here .
' the enchanter looked all round him , but could see nothing , and then the king said again :' i am a blue bird .
' then the enchanter found him in an instant , and seeing his pitiable condition , ran hither and thither without a word , till he had collected a handful of magic herbs , with which , and a few incantations , he speedily made the king whole and sound again .
' now ,' said he , ' let me hear all about it .
there must be a princess at the bottom of this .
'' there are two !'
answered king charming , with a wry smile . and then he told the whole story , accusing fiordelisa of having betrayed the secret of his visits to make her peace with the queen , and indeed saying a great many hard things about her fickleness and her deceitful beauty , and so on .
the enchanter quite agreed with him , and even went further , declaring that all princesses were alike , except perhaps in the matter of beauty , and advised him to have done with fiordelisa , and forget all about her .
but , somehow or other , this advice did not quite please the king .
' what is to be done next ?'
said the enchanter , ' since you still have five years to remain a blue bird .
'' take me to your palace ,' answered the king ; ' there you can at least keep me in a cage safe from cats and swords .
'' well , that will be the best thing to do for the present ,' said his friend .
' but i am not an enchanter for nothing .
i ' m sure to have a brilliant idea for you before long .
' in the meantime fiordelisa , quite in despair , sat at her window day and night calling her dear blue bird in vain , and imagining over and over again all the terrible things that could have happened to him , till she grew quite pale and thin .
as for the queen and turritella , they were triumphant ; but their triumph was short , for the king , fiordelisa ' s father , fell ill and died , and all the people rebelled against the queen and turritella , and came in a body to the palace demanding fiordelisa . the queen came out on the balcony with threats and haughty words , so that at last they lost their patience , and broke open the doors of the palace , one of which fell back on the queen and killed her .
turritella fled to the fairy mazilla , and all the nobles of the kingdom fetched the princess fiordelisa from her prison in the tower , and made her queen .
very soon , with all the care and attention they bestowed on her , she recovered from the effects of her long captivity and looked more beautiful than ever , and was able to take counsel with her courtiers , and arrange for the governing of her kingdom during her absence .
and then , taking a bagful of jewels , she set out all alone to look for the blue bird , without telling anyone where she was going . meanwhile , the enchanter was taking care of king charming , but as his power was not great enough to counteract the fairy mazilla ' s , he at last resolved to go and see if he could make any kind of terms with her for his friend ; for you see , fairies and enchanters are cousins in a sort of way , after all ; and after knowing one another for five or six hundred years and falling out , and making it up again pretty often , they understand one another well enough .
so the fairy mazilla received him graciously .
' and what may you be wanting , gossip ?'
said she .
' you can do a good turn for me if you will ;' he answered .
' a king , who is a friend of mine , was unlucky enough to offend you — '' aha !
i know who you mean ,' interrupted the fairy .
' i am sorry not to oblige you , gossip , but he need expect no mercy from me unless he will marry my goddaughter , whom you see yonder looking so pretty and charming .
let him think over what i say .
' the enchanter hadn ' t a word to say , for he thought turritella really frightful , but he could not go away without making one more effort for his friend the king , who was really in great danger as long as he lived in a cage .
indeed , already he had met with several alarming accidents .
once the nail on which his cage was hung had given way , and his feathered majesty had suffered much from the fall , while madam puss , who happened to be in the room at the time , had given him a scratch in the eye which came very near blinding him .
another time they had forgotten to give him any water to drink , so that he was nearly dead with thirst ; and the worst thing of all was that he was in danger of losing his kingdom , for he had been absent so long that all his subjects believed him to be dead .
so considering all these things the enchanter agreed with the fairy mazilla that she should restore the king to his natural form , and should take turritella to stay in his palace for several months , and if , after the time was over he still could not make up his mind to marry her , he should once more be changed into a blue bird . then the fairy dressed turritella in a magnificent gold and silver robe , and they mounted together on a flying dragon , and very soon reached king charming ' s palace , where he , too , had just been brought by his faithful friend the enchanter . three strokes of the fairy ' s wand restored his natural form , and he was as handsome and delightful as ever , but he considered that he paid dearly for his restoration when he caught sight of turritella , and the mere idea of marrying her made him shudder . meanwhile , queen fiordelisa , disguised as a poor peasant girl , wearing a great straw hat that concealed her face , and carrying an old sack over her shoulder , had set out on her weary journey , and had travelled far , sometimes by sea and sometimes by land ; sometimes on foot , and sometimes on horseback , but not knowing which way to go .
she feared all the time that every step she took was leading her farther from her lover .
one day as she sat , quite tired and sad , on the bank of a little brook , cooling her white feet in the clear running water , and combing her long hair that glittered like gold in the sunshine , a little bent old woman passed by , leaning on a stick .
she stopped , and said to fiordelisa :' what , my pretty child , are you all alone ?
'' indeed , good mother , i am too sad to care for company ,' she answered ; and the tears ran down her cheeks .
' don ' t cry ,' said the old woman , ' but tell me truly what is the matter .
perhaps i can help you .
' the queen told her willingly all that had happened , and how she was seeking the blue bird .
thereupon the little old woman suddenly stood up straight , and grew tall , and young , and beautiful , and said with a smile to the astonished fiordelisa :' lovely queen , the king whom you seek is no longer a bird .
my sister mazilla has given his own form back to him , and he is in his own kingdom .
do not be afraid , you will reach him , and will prosper .
take these four eggs ; if you break one when you are in any great difficulty , you will find aid .
' so saying , she disappeared , and fiordelisa , feeling much encouraged , put the eggs into her bag and turned her steps towards charming ' s kingdom .
after walking on and on for eight days and eight nights , she came at last to a tremendously high hill of polished ivory , so steep that it was impossible to get a foothold on it .
fiordelisa tried a thousand times , and scrambled and slipped , but always in the end found herself exactly where she started from .
at last she sat down at the foot of it in despair , and then suddenly bethought herself of the eggs .
breaking one quickly , she found in it some little gold hooks , and with these fastened to her feet and hands , she mounted the ivory hill without further trouble , for the little hooks saved her from slipping .
as soon as she reached the top a new difficulty presented itself , for all the other side , and indeed the whole valley , was one polished mirror , in which thousands and thousands of people were admiring their reflections .
for this was a magic mirror , in which people saw themselves just as they wished to appear , and pilgrims came to it from the four corners of the world .
but nobody had ever been able to reach the top of the hill , and when they saw fiordelisa standing there , they raised a terrible outcry , declaring that if she set foot on their glass she would break it to pieces .
the queen , not knowing what to do , for she saw it would be dangerous to try to go down , broke the second egg , and out came a chariot , drawn by two white doves , and fiordelisa got into it , and was floated softly away .
after a night and a day the doves alighted outside the gate of king charming ' s kingdom .
here the queen got out of the chariot , and kissed the doves and thanked them , and then with a beating heart she walked into the town , asking the people she met where she could see the king .
but they only laughed at her , crying :' see the king ?
and pray , why do you want to see the king , my little kitchen - maid ?
you had better go and wash your face first , your eyes are not clear enough to see him !'
for the queen had disguised herself , and pulled her hair down about her eyes , that no one might know her .
as they would not tell her , she went on farther , and presently asked again , and this time the people answered that tomorrow she might see the king driving through the streets with the princess turritella , as it was said that at last he had consented to marry her .
this was indeed terrible news to fiordelisa .
had she come all this weary way only to find turritella had succeeded in making king charming forget her ? she was too tired and miserable to walk another step , so she sat down in a doorway and cried bitterly all night long .
as soon as it was light she hastened to the palace , and after being sent away fifty times by the guards , she got in at last , and saw the thrones set in the great hall for the king and turritella , who was already looked on as queen . fiordelisa hid herself behind a marble pillar , and very soon saw turritella make her appearance , richly dressed , but as ugly as ever , and with her came the king , more handsome and splendid even than fiordelisa had remembered him .
when turritella had seated herself on the throne , the queen approached her .
' who are you , and how dare you come near my high - mightiness , on my golden throne ?'
said turritella , frowning fiercely at her .
' they call me the little kitchen - maid ,' she replied , ' and i come to offer some precious things for sale ,' and with that she searched in her old sack , and drew out the emerald bracelets king charming had given her .
' ho , ho !'
said turritella , those are pretty bits of glass .
i suppose you would like five silver pieces for them .
'' show them to someone who understands such things , madam ,' answered the queen ; ' after that we can decide on the price .
' turritella , who really loved king charming as much as she could love anybody , and was always delighted to get a chance of talking to him , now showed him the bracelets , asking how much he considered them worth .
as soon as he saw them he remembered those he had given to fiordelisa , and turned very pale and sighed deeply , and fell into such sad thought that he quite forgot to answer her .
presently she asked him again , and then he said , with a great effort :' i believe these bracelets are worth as much as my kingdom .
i thought there was only one such pair in the world ; but here , it seems , is another .
' then turritella went back to the queen , and asked her what was the lowest price she would take for them .
' more than you would find it easy to pay , madam ,' answered she ; ' but if you will manage for me to sleep one night in the chamber of echoes , i will give you the emeralds .
'' by all means , my little kitchen - maid ,' said turritella , highly delighted . the king did not try to find out where the bracelets had come from , not because he did not want to know , but because the only way would have been to ask turritella , and he disliked her so much that he never spoke to her if he could possibly avoid it .
it was he who had told fiordelisa about the chamber of echoes , when he was a blue bird .
it was a little room below the king ' s own bed - chamber , and was so ingeniously built that the softest whisper in it was plainly heard in the king ' s room .
fiordelisa wanted to reproach him for his faithlessness , and could not imagine a better way than this .
so when , by turritella ' s orders , she was left there she began to weep and lament , and never ceased till daybreak . the king ' s pages told turritella , when she asked them , what a sobbing and sighing they had heard , and she asked fiordelisa what it was all about .
the queen answered that she often dreamed and talked aloud . but by an unlucky chance the king heard nothing of all this , for he took a sleeping draught every night before he lay down , and did not wake up till the sun was high . the queen passed the day in great disquietude .
' if he did hear me ,' she said , ' could he remain so cruelly indifferent ?
but if he did not hear me , what can i do to get another chance ?
i have plenty of jewels , it is true , but nothing remarkable enough to catch turritella ' s fancy .
' just then she thought of the eggs , and broke one , out of which came a little carriage of polished steel ornamented with gold , drawn by six green mice .
the coachman was a rose - coloured rat , the postilion a grey one , and the carriage was occupied by the tiniest and most charming figures , who could dance and do wonderful tricks .
fiordelisa clapped her hands and danced for joy when she saw this triumph of magic art , and as soon as it was evening , went to a shady garden - path down which she knew turritella would pass , and then she made the mice galop , and the tiny people show off their tricks , and sure enough turritella came , and the moment she saw it all cried :' little kitchen - maid , little kitchen - maid , what will you take for your mouse - carriage ?
' and the queen answered :' let me sleep once more in the chamber of echoes .
'' i won ' t refuse your request , poor creature ,' said turritella condescendingly . and then she turned to her ladies and whispered ' the silly creature does not know how to profit by her chances ; so much the better for me .
' when night came fiordelisa said all the loving words she could think of , but alas !
with no better success than before , for the king slept heavily after his draught .
one of the pages said :' this peasant girl must he crazy ;' but another answered :' yet what she says sounds very sad and touching .
' as for fiordelisa , she thought the king must have a very hard heart if he could hear how she grieved and yet pay her no attention .
she had but one more chance , and on breaking the last egg she found to her great delight that it contained a more marvellous thing than ever .
it was a pie made of six birds , cooked to perfection , and yet they were all alive , and singing and talking , and they answered questions and told fortunes in the most amusing way .
taking this treasure fiordelisa once more set herself to wait in the great hall through which turritella was sure to pass , and as she sat there one of the king ' s pages came by , and said to her :' well , little kitchen - maid , it is a good thing that the king always takes a sleeping draught , for if not he would be kept awake all night by your sighing and lamenting .
' then fiordelisa knew why the king had not heeded her , and taking a handful of pearls and diamonds out of her sack , she said , ' if you can promise me that tonight the king shall not have his sleeping draught , i will give you all these jewels .'' oh !
i promise that willingly ,' said the page . at this moment turritella appeared , and at the first sight of the savoury pie , with the pretty little birds all singing and chattering , she cried :' that is an admirable pie , little kitchen - maid .
pray what will you take for it ?
'' the usual price ,' she answered .
' to sleep once more in the chamber of echoes .
'' by all means , only give me the pie ,' said the greedy turritella .
and when night was come , queen fiordelisa waited till she thought everybody in the palace would be asleep , and then began to lament as before .
' ah , charming !'
she said , ' what have i ever done that you should forsake me and marry turritella ?
if you could only know all i have suffered , and what a weary way i have come to seek you .
' now the page had faithfully kept his word , and given king charming a glass of water instead of his usual sleeping draught , so there he lay wide awake , and heard every word fiordelisa said , and even recognised her voice , though he could not tell where it came from .
' ah , princess !'
he said , ' how could you betray me to our cruel enemies when i loved you so dearly ?
' fiordelisa heard him , and answered quickly :' find out the little kitchen - maid , and she will explain everything .
' then the king in a great hurry sent for his pages and said :' if you can find the little kitchen - maid , bring her to me at once .
'' nothing could be easier , sire ,' they answered , ' for she is in the chamber of echoes .
' the king was very much puzzled when he heard this .
how could the lovely princess fiordelisa be a little kitchen - maid ?
or how could a little kitchen - maid have fiordelisa ' s own voice ?
so he dressed hastily , and ran down a little secret staircase which led to the chamber of echoes .
there , on a heap of soft cushions , sat his lovely princess .
she had laid aside all her ugly disguises and wore a white silken robe , and her golden hair shone in the soft lamp - light .
the king was overjoyed at the sight , and rushed to throw himself at her feet , and asked her a thousand questions without giving her time to answer one .
fiordelisa was equally happy to be with him once more , and nothing troubled them but the remembrance of the fairy mazilla .
but at this moment in came the enchanter , and with him a famous fairy , the same in fact who had given fiordelisa the eggs .
after greeting the king and queen , they said that as they were united in wishing to help king charming , the fairy mazilla had no longer any power against him , and he might marry fiordelisa as soon as he pleased .
the king ' s joy may be imagined , and as soon as it was day the news was spread through the palace , and everybody who saw fiordelisa loved her directly .
when turritella heard what had happened she came running to the king , and when she saw fiordelisa with him she was terribly angry , but before she could say a word the enchanter and the fairy changed her into a big brown owl , and she floated away out of one of the palace windows , hooting dismally .
then the wedding was held with great splendour , and king charming and queen fiordelisa lived happily ever after .
