with his suite the tsar departed . the tsaritsa tender - heartedat the window sat alone , wishing he would hurry home . all day every day she waited , gazing till her dedicatedeyes grew weak from overstrain , gazing at the empty plain , not a sign of her beloved ! nothing but the snowflakes hurriedheaping drifts upon the lea . earth was white as white could be . nine long months she sat and waited , kept her vigil unabated . then from god on christmas eveshe a daughter did receive . next day early in the morning , love and loyalty rewarding , home again from travel farcame at last the father - tsar . one fond glance at him she darted , gasped for joy with thin lips parted , then fell back upon her bedand by prayer - time was dead . long the tsar sat lonely , brooding . but he , too , was only human . tears for one sad year he shed ... and another woman wed . she ( if one be strictly truthful ) was a born tsaritsa ? youthful , slim , tall , fair to look upon , clever , witty ? and so on . but she was in equal measurestubborn , haughty , wilful , jealous . in her dowry rich and vastwas a little looking - glass . it had this unique distinction : it could speak with perfect diction . only with this glass would shein a pleasant humour be . many times a day she ' d greet itand coquettishly entreat it :" tell me , pretty looking - glass , nothing but the truth , i ask : who in all the world is fairestand has beauty of the rarest ?
" and the looking - glass replied :" you , it cannot be denied . you in all the world are fairestand your beauty is the rarest .
" the tsaritsa laughed with glee , shrugged her shoulders merrily , puffed her cheeks and bat her eyelids , flicked her fingers coyly , slyly , pranced around with hand on hips , arrogance upon her lips . all this time the tsar ' s own daughterquietly , as nature taught her , grew and grew , and came quite soonlike a flower into bloom : raven - browed , of fair complexion , breathing kindness and affection . and the choice of fiancelighted on prince yelisei . suit was made .
the tsar consentedand her dowry was indented : seven towns with wealthy store , mansion - houses ?
sevenscore . on the night before the weddingfor a bridal party dressingthe tsaritsa , time to pass , chatted with her looking - glass :" who in all the world is fairestand has beauty of the rarest ?
" then what did the glass reply ?
" you are fair , i can ' t deny . but the princess is the fairestand her beauty is the rarest .
" up the proud tsaritsa jumped . on the table how she thumped , angrily the mirror slapping , slipper heel in fury tapping !
" o you loathsome looking - glass , telling lies as bold as brass ! by what right is she my rival ? such young folly i shall bridle . so she ' s grown up ? me to spite ! little wonder she ' s so white : with her bulging mother gazingat that snow ? what ' s so amazing ! now look here , explain to mehow can she the fairer be ? scour this realm of ours and seek well , nowhere shall you find my equal . is not that the truth ?"
she cried . still the looking - glass replied :" but the princess is the fairestand her beauty is the rarest .
" the tsaritsa burst with spite , hurled the mirror out of sightunderneath the nearest cupboard , and when breath she had recoveredsummoned smudge , her chamber maid , and to her instructions gave :" take the princess to the forest , bind her hand and foot and foreheadto a tree !
when wolves arrivelet them eat the girl alive !
" woman ' s wrath would daunt the devil ! protest was no use whatever . soon the princess left with smudgefor the woods .
so far they trudgedthat the princess guessed the reason . scared to death by such foul treason , loud she pleaded : " spare my life ! innocent of guilt am i ! do not kill me , i beseech you ! and when i become tsaritsai shall give you rich reward .
" smudge , who really loved her ward , being loth to kill or bind her , let her go , remarking kindly :" god be with you !
do not moan !
" and , this said , went back alone ." well ?"
demanded the tsaritsa ," where ' s that pretty little creature ?
"" in the forest on her own ," smudge replied .
" and there she ' ll stay . to a tree i firmly lashed her . when a hungry beast attacks hershe ' ll have little time to cryand the quicker she shall die !
" rumour spread and caused a panic :" what , the tsar ' s own daughter vanished !
" mournful was the tsar that day . but the young prince yeliseioffered god a fervent prayerand departed then and thereto seek out and homeward guidehis sweet - tempered , youthful bride . meanwhile his young bride kept walkingthrough the forest until morning , vague as to her whereabouts . suddenly she spied a house . out a dog ran growling , yapping , then sat down , his tail tap - tapping . at the gate there was no guard . all was quiet in the yard . close at heel the good dog boundedas the princess slowly mountedstairs to gain the living floor , turned the ring upon the door . silently the door swung openand before her eyes unfoldeda bright chamber : all aroundbenches strewn with rugs she found , board of oak beneath the ikonand a stove with tiles to lie on . to the princess it was clearkindly folk were dwelling herewho would not deny her shelter . no one was at home , however . so she set to , cleaned the pans , made the whole house spick and span , lit a candle in the corner , fed the fire to be warmer , climbed onto the platform bedthere to lay her sleepy head . dinner time .
the yard resounded , horses stamped and men dismounted . thick - moustached and ruddy - skinned , seven lusty knights walked in . said the eldest : " how amazing ! all so neat !
the fire blazing ! somebody ' s been cleaning hereand is waiting somewhere near . who is there ?
come out of hiding ! be a friend in peace abiding ! if you ' re someone old and hoar , be our uncle evermore ! if you ' re young and love a scuffle . we ' ll embrace you as a brother . if a venerable dame , then shall ' mother ' be your name . if a maiden fair , we ' ll call youour dear sister and adore you .
" so the princess rose , came downto the seven knights and bowed , her good wishes emphasising , blushing and apologisingthat to their delightful homeuninvited she had come . straight they saw her speech bore witnessto the presence of a princess . so they cleared a corner seat , offered her a pie with meat , filled a glass with wine and served iton a tray , as she deserved it . but the glass of heady wineshe politely did declineand the pie she broke with caution , savouring a tiny portion . pleading she was very tired , soon she gracefully retiredand the seven knights conveyed herto the best and brightest chamberand , away as they did creep , she was falling fast asleep . days flew by ? the princess livingall the time without misgivingin the forest , never boredwith the seven knights abroad . darkness would the earth still coverwhen at dawn the seven brotherswould ride out to try their luckwith a long - bow , shooting duck , or to ply their sword in battleand a saracen unsaddle , headlong at a tartar go , chop his head off at a blow , or give chase to a circassian , from the forest send him dashing . she , as lady of the house , rose much later , moved aboutdusting , polishing and cooking , never once the knights rebuking . they , too , never chided her . days flew by like gossamer . and in time they grew to love her . thereupon all seven brothersshortly after dawn one dayto her chamber made their wayand the eldest knight addressed her :" as you know , you are our sister . but all seven of us hereare in love with you , my dear , and we all desire your favours . but that must not be .
god save us ! find some way to give us peace ! be a wife to one at least , to the rest remain a sister ! but you shake your head .
is this tosay our offer you refuse ? nothing from our stock you ' ll choose ?
"" o my brave and bonny brothers , virtuous beyond all others !
" in reply the princess ' said ," god in heaven strike me deadif my answer be not honest : i ' ve no choice ? my hand is promised ! you ' re all equal in my eyes , all so valiant and wise , and i love you all , dear brothers ! but my heart is to anotherpledged for evermore .
one dayi shall wed prince yelisei !
" hushed , the brothers kept their station , scratched their foreheads in frustration .
" as you wish !
so now we know ," said the eldest with a bow .
" pray forgive us ? and i promiseyou ' ll hear nothing further from us !
"" i ' m not angry ," she replied .
" by my pledge i must abide .
" bowing low , the seven suitorsleft her room with passions muted . so in harmony againdid they live and friendship reign . the tsaritsa was still lividevery time she saw in vividmemory the princess fair . long the mirror , lying there , was the object of her hatred ; but at last her wrath abated . so one day it came to passthat she took the looking - glassup again and sat before it , smiled and , as before , implored it :" greetings , pretty looking - glass ! tell me all the truth , i ask : who in all the world is fairestand has beauty of the rarest ?
" said the mirror in reply :" you are fair , i can ' t deny . but where seven knights go ridingin a green oak - grove residinghumbly lives a person whois more beautiful than you .
" the tsaritsa ' s wrath descendedon her maid : " what folly temptedyou to lie ?
you disobeyed !
" smudge a full confession made ... uttering a threat of torture , the tsaritsa grimly swore tosend the princess to her deathor not draw another breath . one day by her window waitingfor her brothers homeward hastingsat the young princess and span . suddenly the dog beganbarking .
through the courtyard scurrieda poor beggar - woman , worriedby the dog she kept at baywith her stick .
" don ' t go away ! stay there , stay !"
the princess shouted , from the window leaning outward .
" let me call the dog to heeland i ' ll offer you a meal .
" and the beggar - woman answered :" pretty child , you take my fancy ! for that dog of yours , you see , could well be the death of me . see him snarling , bristling yonder ! come here , child !"
the princess wantedto go out , and took a loaf . but the dog its body woveround her feet , refused to let herstep towards the woman - beggar . when the woman , too , drew near , wilder than an angry bearit attacked her .
how perplexing !
" had a bad night ' s sleep , i reckon !
" said the princess .
" catch it !
there !
" and the bread flew through the air . the poor beggar - woman caught it .
" i most humbly thank you , daughter , god be merciful !"
said she .
" in return take this from me !
" the bright apple she was holding , newly picked , fresh , ripe and golden , straight towards the princess flew ... how the dog leapt in pursuit ! but the princess neatly trapped itin her palms .
" enjoy the appleat you leisure , little pet ! thank you for the loaf of bread ..." said the beggar - woman , brandishedin the air her stick and vanished ... up the stairs the princess ranwith the dog , which then beganpitifully staring , whiningjust as if its heart were piningfor the gift of speech to say :" throw that apple far away !
" hastily his neck she patted :" hey , sokolko , what ' s the matter ? lie down !"
entering once moreher own room , she shut the door , sat there with her spindle humming , waiting for her brothers ' coming . but she could not take her gazefrom the apple where it layfull of fragrance , rosy , glowing , fresh and juicy , ripe and golden , sweet as honey to the lips ! she could even see the pips ... first the princess thought of waitinguntil dinner .
but temptationproved too strong .
she grasped the brightapple , took a stealthy biteand with fair cheek sweetly holloweda delicious morsel swallowed . all at once her breathing stopped , listlessly her white arms dropped . from her lap the rosy appletumbled to the floor .
the haplessmaiden closed her swooning eyes , reeled and fell without a cry , on the bench her forehead striking , then lay still beneath the ikon ... now the brothers , as it chanced , were returning in a bandfrom another warlike foray . out to meet them in the forestwent the dog and , running hard , led them straight into the yard . said the knights : " an evil omen ! grief in store !"
the door they opened , walked into the room and gasped . but the dog like lightning dashedfor the apple and devoured it . death that instant overpowered it . for the apple was , they saw , filled with poison to the core . by the dead princess the brothersbent their heads in tears and utteredholy prayer to save her soul ; nothing could their grief console . from the bench they raised her , dressed her , wished within a grave to rest her , then had second thoughts .
for shewas as rosy as if sleepgarlands of repose were wreathinground her ? though she was not breathing . three whole days they waited , butstill her eyes were tightly shut . so that night with solemn ritualin a coffin made of crystalthey laid out the body fairof the princess and from thereto a hollow mountain bore her , where a tomb they fashioned for her : iron chains they used to fixher glass case to pillars sixwith due caution , and erectediron railings to protect it . then the eldest smote his breastand the dead princess addressed :" ever peaceful be your slumber ! though your days were few in numberon this earth ? spite took its toll ? yet shall heaven have your soul . with pure love did we regard you , for your loved one did we guard you , but you came not to the groom , only to a chill dark tomb .
" that same day the bad tsaritsa , waiting for good news to reach her , secretly the mirror tookand her usual question put :" who is now by far the fairestand has beauty of the rarest ?
" and the answer satisfied :" you , it cannot be denied . you in all the world are fairestand your beauty is the rarest !
" in pursuit of his sweet bridethrough the country far and widestill prince yelisei goes riding , weeping bitterly .
no tidings ! for no matter whom he askspeople either turn their backsor most rudely rock with laughter : no one knows what he is after . now to the bright sun in zealdid the bold young prince appeal :" sun , dear sun !
the whole year coursingthrough the sky , in springtime thawingfrom the chill earth winter snow ! you observe us all below . surely you ' ll not grudge an answer ? tell me , did you ever chance tosee the princess i revere ? i ' m her fiance ."
" my dear ," said the sun with some insistence ," i have nowhere seen your princess , so she ' s dead , we must presume , that is , if my friend , the moon , has not met her on his travelsor seen clues you may unravel .
" through the dark night yelisei , feeling anything but gay , with a lover ' s perseverancewaited for the moon ' s appearance .
" moon , o moon , my friend !"
he said ," gold of horn and round of head , from the darkest shadows rising , with your eye the world apprising , you whom stars with love regardas you mount your nightly guard ! surely you ' ll not grudge an answer ? tell me , did you ever chance tosee the princess i revere ? i ' m her fiance ."
" o dear !
" said the moon in consternation ," no , i have not seen the maiden . on my round i only gowhen it is my turn , you know . it would seem that i was restingwhen she passed ."
" how very vexing !
" cried aloud prince yelisei . but the moon went on to say :" wait a minute !
i suggest youhave the wind come to the rescue . call him now !
it ' s worth a try . and cheer up a bit !
goodbye !
" yelisei , not losing courage , to the wind ' s abode now hurried .
" wind , o wind !
lord of the sky , herding flocks of clouds on high , stirring up the dark - blue ocean , setting all the air in motion , unafraid of anyonesaving god in heaven alone ! surely you ' ll not grudge an answer ? tell me , did you ever chance tosee the princess i revere ? i ' m her fiance ."
" o hear !
" said the wind in turmoil blowing .
" where a quiet stream is flowingstands a mountain high and steepin it lies a cavern deep ; in this cave in shadows dismalsways a coffin , made of crystal . hung by chains from pillars six . round it barren land in whichno man ever meets another . in that tomb your bride discover !
" with a howl the wind was gone . yelisei wept loud and long . to the barren land he journeyeddesperately , sadly yearningonce again to see his bride . on he rode .
a mountain highrose before him , soaring steeplyfrom a land laid waste completely . at its foot ? an entrance dim . yelisei went quickly in . there , he saw , in shadows dismalswayed a coffin made of crystalwhere the princess lay at restin the deep sleep of the blest . and the prince in tears dissolvingthrew himself upon the coffin ... and it broke !
the maiden straightcame to life , sat up , in greatwonder looked about and yawningas she set her bed see - sawingsaid with pretty arms outstretched :" gracious me !
how long i ' ve slept !
" down she stepped from out the coffin . o the sighing and the sobbing ! carrying his bride , he strodeback to daylight .
home they rode , making pleasant conversationtill they reached their destination . swiftly rumour spread around :" the princess is safe and sound !
" it so happened the tsaritsain her room was idly seatedby her magic looking - glassand to pass the time did ask :" who in all the world is fairestand has beauty of the rarest ?
" said the mirror in reply :" you are fair , i can ' t deny , but the princess is the fairestand her beauty is the rarest !
" the tsaritsa leapt and smashedon the floor her looking - glass , rushing to the door she saw thefair young princess walk towards her . overcome by grief and spite , the tsaritsa died that night . from the grave where she was buriedto a wedding people hurried , for the good prince yeliseiwed his princess that same day . never since the world ' s creationwas there such a celebration ; i was there , drank mead and yetbarely got my whiskers wet .
