a poor man had so many children that he had already asked every one in the world to be godfather , and when still another child was born , no one else was left whom he could invite .
he knew not what to do , and , in his perplexity , he lay down and fell asleep .
then he dreamt that he was to go outside the gate , and ask the first person who met him to be godfather .
when he awoke , he determined to obey his dream , and went outside the gate , and asked the first person who came up to him to be godfather .
the stranger presented him with a little glass of water , and said , " this is a wonderful water , with it thou canst heal the sick , only thou must see where death is standing .
if he is standing by the patient ' s head , give the patient some of the water and he will be healed , but if death is standing by his feet , all trouble will be in vain , for the sick man must die ."
from this time forth , the man could always say whether a patient could be saved or not , and became famous for his skill , and earned a great deal of money .
once he was called in to the child of the king , and when he entered , he saw death standing by the child ' s head and cured it with the water , and he did the same a second time , but the third time death was standing by its feet , and then he knew the child was forced to die . once the man thought he would visit the godfather , and tell him how he had succeeded with the water .
but when he entered the house , it was such a strange establishment !
on the first flight of stairs , the broom and shovel were disputing , and knocking each other about violently .
he asked them , " where does the godfather live ?"
the broom replied , " one flight of stairs higher up ."
when he came to the second flight , he saw a heap of dead fingers lying .
he asked , " where does the godfather live ?"
one of the fingers replied , " one flight of stairs higher ."
on the third flight lay a heap of dead heads , which again directed him to the flight beyond .
on the fourth flight , he saw fishes on the fire , which frizzled in the pans and baked themselves .
they , too , said , " one flight of stairs higher ."
and when he had ascended the fifth , he came to the door of a room and peeped through the keyhole , and there he saw the godfather who had a pair of long horns .
when he opened the door and went in , the godfather got into bed in a great hurry and covered himself up .
then said the man , " sir godfather , what a strange household you have !
when i came to your first flight of stairs , the shovel and broom were quarreling , and beating each other violently .
"" how stupid you are !"
said the godfather .
" that was the boy and the maid talking to each other ."
- " but on the second flight i saw dead fingers lying ."
- " oh , how silly you are !
those were some roots of scorzonera ."
- " on the third flight lay a heap of dead men ' s heads ."
- " foolish man , those were cabbages ."
- " on the fourth flight , i saw fishes in a pan , which were hissing and baking themselves ."
when he had said that , the fishes came and served themselves up .
" and when i got to the fifth flight , i peeped through the keyhole of a door , and there , godfather , i saw you , and you had long , long horns ."
- " oh , that is a lie !"
the man became alarmed , and ran out , and if he had not , who knows what the godfather would have done to him .
