an old man lived with his good - wifeby the shore of the deep blue oceanin a hovel of clay and wattle ; they had lived there for three years and thirty . the old man netted fishes , the good - wife sat at her spinning . once he cast his net on the waters ; the net came up - full of sea - slime . again he cast the net on the waters ; the net came back - full of sea - weed . a third time the net sank in the watersand came up with one fish in it . no common fish , but a golden . the golden fish begged for mercyand spoke with the voice of a human :" old man , throw me back in the ocean , i will pay you a splendid ransom : i will grant you whatever you wish for ."
the old man was amazed and awestruck : he had fished here for three years and thirtybut never once heard a fish talking . freeing the fish from the mesheshe gave him fair words and gentle :" golden fish , go your ways in peace nowthere is no need to pay me a ransom ; go back to your deep blue seasand swim there and splash as you please .
" the old man returned to his good - wife . and what do you think ?
a palacenow houses the shrewish old woman . she sits in state at her table . great nobles and lords wait upon her , serve her wine in a golden gobletwhile she nibbles at crested sweet - meats ; stern sentries mount guard about hereach with an axe at the ready . the old man took one look - his knees failed him ! he bowed to the ground before herbut spoke out : " all hail , dread empress ! tell me , is you heart content now ?
" not a glance did his good - wife spare himbut ordered her men to remove him . again he went down to the oceanand saw - a black storm had arisen : angry waves reared up to meet him , all a - quake , all a - swirl , all a - roaring . but he raised his voice and shouted , and the golden fish came swimming :" what is it , old man , come , tell me !
" with a low bow the old man made answer :" be gracious , lord of fishes ! what can i do with the woman ? the old fool will no longer be empress , she will rule over sea and ocean ; in the deep she will make her strongholdand have you yourself to serve herand swim back and forth on her errands .
" the golden fish said nothing ; with a flick of its tail in the waterit swam away , back to the deep sea . the old man by the shore stood waitingfor a long time , but got no answer . at last , he returned to his good - wife .
