in the country where anansi lived , a big famine broke out , because there was a flood .
after that a hard drought had come .
so all the food in the fields went bad .
the cassava and potato was spoiled .
all the banana trees fell down .
there was no food . it was like in the time of josef .
egypt had food , but the other countries didn ' t .
then the people went to buy good in egypt .
you can read that story of josef in the bible . in this anansi story , the king had a difficult name .
he wasn ' t greedy .
but he did the following .
he said : " everybody that wants to work , can have food .
they can come to pick cassava , or pluck potatoes .
they can come to chop plantain .
but first they must tell me my name .
if you do not know my name , you must leave behind all the things you have taken from the fields .
" anansi called akuba .
he said : " listen , i am going to go to the country to listen to the king ' s name .
but you must help me .
you must put a diaper on me .
then you will place a small bottle of porridge next to me in a basket where i am going to sleep .
the cloth must be so full that the king cannot see how big i am .
do you understand ?
then you take your big basket and put as much food in it as you can carry .
if you don ' t manage to carry it , you will drag it .
i will help you afterwards .
then i will try to hear what the king ' s name is .
" akuba said : " ok ." early the next day , at sunrise , he went on the road with anansi .
anansi was carrying the small basket .
but when they get close to the country , akuba puts the diaper on him , puts him in the small basket , en carries him . he said : " my king , i beg you , can ' t i take a little bit of food from your fields ?
" king says : " yes , my dear , you can come .
but think well .
if you don ' t know my name , you must leave all the food you pluck .
" akuba said : " i know that , my king .
i will guess .
perhaps i can find it .
akuba furthermore said : " my king , i have a little boy here .
i don ' t have anybody to look after this little boy .
he is about nine months .
i can ' t leave him in the house all alone .
i have no one .
i am begging you , my king , can ' t i put him on the side right here ?
i will put a bottle of porridge for him .
if he cries , you can give it to him .
then he will stay quiet .
" at noon , anansi begins to cry and cry .
king gives him the porridge . but akuba picksup the food .
other people help him , and help him until the afternoon .
the sun begins to set .
then he gets to the king ' s house . when anansi finishes eating the porridge , he peed a lot .
the whole diaper is soaking wet .
then he raises his voices and starts to shout . when a baby is wet , you must change his diaper .
king doesn ' t know how to do that .
he also doesn ' t have the patience .
he said : " why are you shouting so ?
" king has a look in the basket .
he said : " what do we have here , kongodifa ?
a small boy of a few month , how can it pee so much ?
where does all the water come from ?
it cannot only be from inside his belly !
yes , my kongodifa , what do we have here today ?
so anansi heard the name . when akuba came back with the basket , king said : " the boy make noise , you hear .
" the mother said : " yes , my king .
jeez , the boy was whiny , right ?
" king said : " he was sweet except for the peeing .
he peed right in front of me .
i didn ' t know what to do .
i won ' t touch him , you hear .
i won ' t touch him .
" akuba said : " my king , i will carry him away , because i am not carrying anything worth while for him .
i will get him up with the water .
" king said : " yes , but you cannot take the basket with the food .
you must first tell me my name .
" he said : " king , is it a difficult name ?
" king said : " i don ' t know .
"" is it an easy name ?
what letter does the name start with ?
" king said : " no no , that i can ' t tell you .
" akuba said : " well , i will guess .
king is not called anansi , because my husband is called anansi .
" king said : " what a foolish name .
no , i am not called that .
"" king , is your name wan ?
" king laughed .
" is your name weri ?
is your name kwaku ?
is your name kofi ?..."
akuba said : " king , once i heard an anansi story , a story a person told me .
in that story , the king was called ..." king said : " yes , tell me .
"" the king was called king kongodifa .
" king said : " what ?!
how do you know my name ?
that is my name .
yes , kongodifa .
" akuba said : " yes , kongodifa , that was how king was called ."
because anansi whispered softly in his ear when he came : " kongodifa ."
akuba heard it from anansi . king said : " well , it is okay .
you guessed right .
but you mustn ' t tell anyone else .
then you can go home with your basket with your food .
another day you can come back , but you mustn ' t bring this boy anymore .
" when they get around the corner , they change .
anansi takes the heavy basket with food .
they laugh a lot . a little while later anansi had food for a whole month .
as long as there was a famine , akuba could go to take from from king kongodifa ' s fields .
anansi solved the problem himself . it had to be anansi !
