lisa is born from a rose - leaf , and dieth through a fairy ' s curse ; her mother layeth her in a chamber and biddeth her brother not to open the door .
but his wife being very jealous , wishing to see what is shut therein , openeth the door , and findeth lisa well and alive , and attiring her in slave raiments , treateth her with cruelty .
lisa being at last recognised by her uncle , he sendeth his wife home to her relations , and giveth his niece in marriage . in days of yore , and in times long gone before , there lived a baron of serva - scura , and he had a young sister , a damsel of uncommon beauty , who often fared to the gardens in company of other young damsels of her age .
one day of the days they went as usual , and beheld a rose - tree which had a beautiful fully opened rose upon it , and they agreed to wager that whosoever should jump clear above the tree without damaging the rose would win so much .
then the damsels began to jump one after the other , but none could clear the tree ; till it coming to cilia ' s turn ( thus was the baron ' s sister hight ), she took a little longer distance , and ran quickly , and jumped , and cleared the tree without touching the rose , and only a single leaf fell to the ground .
she quickly picked it up , and swallowed it before any of the others perceived aught , and thus won the wager . three days had hardly passed , when she felt that she was with child , and finding that such was the case she nearly died with grief , well wotting that she had done naught to bring such a catastrophe upon her , and she could not suppose in any way how this had occurred .
therefore she ran to the house of some fairies , her friends , and relating to them her case , they told her that there was no doubt but that she was with child of the leaf she had swallowed . cilia hearing this hid her state as long as it was possible , but the time came at length for her delivery , and she gave birth secretly to a beauteous woman - child , her face like a moon in her fourteenth night , and she named her lisa , and sent her to the fairies to be brought up .
now each of the fairies gave to the child a charm ; but the last of them , wanting to run and see her , in so doing twisted the foot , and for the anguish of pain she felt cursed her , saying that when she should reach her seventh year , her mother in combing her hair would forget the comb sticking in the hair on her head , and this would cause her to die .
and years went by till the time came , and the mishap took place , and the wretched mother was in despair at this great misfortune , and after weeping and wailing , ordered seven crystal chests one within the other , and had her child put within them , and then the chest was laid in a distant chamber in the palace ; and she kept the key in her pocket . but daily after this her health failed , her cark and care bringing her to the last step of her life ; and when she felt her end drawing near , she sent for her brother , and said to him , " o my brother , i feel death slowly and surely come upon me , therefore i leave to thee all my belongings .
be thou the only lord and master ; only must thou take a solemn oath that thou wilt never open the furtherest chamber in this palace , of which i consign to thee the key , which thou wilt keep within thy desk .
" her brother , who loved her dearly , gave her the required promise , and she bade him farewell and died . after a year had passed the baron took to himself a wife , and being one day invited to a hunt by some of his friends , he gave the palace in charge to his wife , begging her not to open the forbidden chamber , whose key was in his desk .
but no sooner had he left the palace than dire suspicion entered in her mind , and turned by jealousy , and fired by curiosity ( the first dower of womankind ), she took the key , and opened the door , and beheld the seven crystal chests , through which she could perceive a beauteous child , lying as it were in a deep sleep .
and she had grown as any other child of her age would , and the chests had lengthened with her . the jealous woman , sighting this charming creature , cried , " bravo my priest ; key in waistband , and ram within ; this is the reason why i was so earnestly begged not to open this door , so that i should not behold mohammed , whom he worshippeth within these chests .
" thus saying , she pulled her out by the hair of her head ; and whilst so doing the comb which her mother had left on her head fell off , and she came again to life , and cried out , " o mother mine , o mother mine .
" answered the baroness ," i ' ll give thee mamma and papa ;" and embittered as a slave , and an - angered as a bitch keeping watch on her young , and with poison full as an asp , she at once cut off the damsel ' s hair , and gave her a good drubbing , and arrayed her in rags .
every day she beat her on her head , and gave her black eyes , and scratched her face and made her mouth to bleed just as if she had eaten raw pigeons . but when her husband came back and saw this child so badly treated , he asked the reason of such cruelty ; and she answered that she was a slave - girl sent her by her aunt , so wicked and perverse that it was necessary to beat her so as to keep her in order . after a time the baron had occasion to go to a country fair , and he , being a very noble and kind - hearted lord , asked of all his household people from the highest to the lowest not leaving out even the cats , what thing they would like him to bring for them , and one bade him buy one thing , and another another , till at the last he came to the young slave - girl . but his wife did not act as a christian should , and said , " put this slave in the dozen , and let us do all things within the rule , as we all should like to make water in the same pot ; leave her alone and let us not fill her with presumption .
" but the lord , being by nature kind , would ask the young slave what she should like him to bring her , and she replied , " i should like to have a doll , a knife , and some pumice stone ; and if thou shouldst forget it , mayst thou be unable to pass the river which will be in thy way .
" and the baron fared forth , and bought all the gifts he had promised to bring , but he forgot that which his niece had bade him bring ; and when the lord on his way home came to the river , the river threw up stones , and carried away the trees from the mountain to the shore , and thus cast the basis of fear , and uplifted the wall of wonderment , so that it was impossible for the lord to pass that way ; and he at last remembered the curse of the young slave , and turning back , bought her the three things , and then returned home , and gave to each the gifts he had brought .
and he gave to lisa also what pertained to her . as soon as she had her gifts in her possession , she retired in the kitchen , and putting the doll before her , she began to weep , and wail , and lament , telling that inanimate piece of wood the story of her travails , speaking as she would have done to a living being ; and perceiving that the doll answered not , she took up the knife and sharpening it on the pumice stone , said , " if thou wilt not answer me , i shall kill myself , and thus will end the feast ;" and the doll swelled up as a bagpipe , and at last answered , " yes , i did hear thee , i am not deaf .
" now this went on for several days , till one day the baron , who had one of his portraits hung up near the kitchen , heard all this weeping and talking of the young slave - girl , and wanting to see to whom she spake , he put his eye to the keyhole , and beheld lisa with the doll before her , to whom she related how her mother had jumped over the rose - tree , how she had swallowed the leaf , how herself had been born , how the fairies had each given her a charm , how the youngest fairy had cursed her , how the comb had been left on her head by her mother , how she had been put within seven crystal chests and shut up in a distant chamber , how her mother had died , and how she had left the key to her brother .
then she spoke of his going a - hunting , and the wife ' s jealousy , how she disobeyed her husband ' s behest and entered within the chamber , and how she had cut her hair , and how she treated her like a slave and beat her cruelly , and she wept and lamented saying , " answer me , o my doll ; if not , i shall kill myself with this knife ;" and sharpening it on the pumice stone , she was going to slay herself , when the baron kicked down the door , and snatched the knife out of her hands , and bade her relate to him the story . when she had ended , he embraced her as his own niece , and led her out of his palace to the house of a relative , where he commanded that she should be well entreated so that she should become cheerful in mind and healthy of body , as owing to the ill treatment she had endured she had lost all strength and healthful hue .
and lisa , receiving kindly treatment , in a few months became as beautiful as a goddess , and her uncle sent for her to come to his palace , and gave a great banquet in her honour , and presented her to his guests as his niece , and bade lisa relate to them the story of her past troubles . hearing the cruelty with which she had been entreated by his wife , all the guests wept .
and he bade his wife return to her family , as for her jealousy and unseemly behaviour she was not worthy to be his mate ; and after a time gave to his niece a handsome and worthy husband whom she loved ; which touched the level that : when a man least goods of any kind expecteth , the heavens will pour upon him every grace .
