a poor man had twelve children and had to work day and night in order just to feed them .
thus when the thirteenth came into the world , not knowing what to do in his need , he ran out into the highway , intending to ask the first person whom he met to be the godfather .
the first person who came his way was our dear god , who already knew what was in his heart , and god said to him , " poor man , i pity you .
i will hold your child at his baptism , and care for him , and make him happy on earth ."
the man said , " who are you ?"
- " i am god ."
- " then i do not wish to have you for a godfather ," said the man .
" you give to the rich , and let the poor starve ."
thus spoke the man , for he did not know how wisely god divides out wealth and poverty .
then he turned away from the lord , and went on his way .
then the devil came to him and said , " what are you looking for ?
if you will take me as your child ' s godfather , i will give him an abundance of gold and all the joys of the world as well ."
the man asked , " who are you ?"
- " i am the devil ."
- " then i do not wish to have you for a godfather ," said the man .
you deceive mankind and lead them astray ."
he went on his way , and then death , on his withered legs , came walking toward him , and said , " take me as your child ' s godfather ."
the man asked , " who are you ?"
- " i am death , who makes everyone equal ."
then the man said , " you are the right one .
you take away the rich as well as the poor , without distinction .
you shall be my child ' s godfather .
death answered , " i will make your child rich and famous , for he who has me for a friend cannot fail ."
the man said , " next sunday is the baptism .
be there on time ."
death appeared as he had promised , and served as godfather in an orderly manner . after the boy came of age his godfather appeared to him one day and asked him to go with him .
he took him out into the woods and showed him an herb that grew there , saying , " now you shall receive your godfather ' s present .
i will turn you into a famous physician .
whenever you are called to a sick person i will appear to you .
if i stand at the sick person ' s head , you may say with confidence that you can make him well again ; then give him some of this herb , and he will recover .
but if i stand at the sick person ' s feet , he is mine , and you must say that he is beyond help , and that no physician in the world could save him .
but beware of using this herb against my will , or something very bad will happen to you .
" it was not long before the young man had become the most famous physician in the whole world .
people said of him , " he only needs to look at the sick in order to immediately know their condition , whether they will regain their health , or are doomed to die ."
and people came to him from far and wide , taking him to their sick , and giving him so much money that he soon became a wealthy man .
now it came to pass that the king became ill .
the physician was summoned and was told to say if a recovery were possible .
however , when he approached the bed , death was standing at the sick man ' s feet , and so no herb on earth would be able to help him .
" if i could only deceive death for once ," thought the physician .
" he will be angry , of course , but because i am his godson he will shut one eye .
i will risk it ."
he therefore took hold of the sick man and laid him the other way around , so that death was now standing at his head .
then he gave the king some of the herb , and he recovered and became healthy again .
however , death came to the physician , made a dark and angry face , threatened him with his finger , and said , " you have betrayed me .
i will overlook it this time because you are my godson , but if you dare to do it again , it will cost you your neck , for i will take you yourself away with me .
" soon afterward the king ' s daughter became seriously ill . she was his only child , and he cried day and night until his eyes were going blind .
then he proclaimed that whosoever rescued her from death should become her husband and inherit the crown .
when the physician came to the sick girl ' s bed he saw death at her feet .
he should have remembered his godfather ' s warning , but he was so infatuated by the princess ' s great beauty and the prospect of becoming her husband that he threw all thought to the winds .
he did not see that death was looking at him angrily , lifting his hand into the air , and threatening him with his withered fist .
he lifted up the sick girl and placed her head where her feet had been .
then he gave her some of the herb , and her cheeks immediately turned red , and life stirred in her once again . death , seeing that he had been cheated out of his property for a second time , approached the physician with long strides and said , " you are finished .
now it is your turn ."
then death seized him so firmly with his ice - cold hand that he could not resist , and led him into an underground cavern .
there the physician saw how thousands and thousands of candles were burning in endless rows , some large , others medium - sized , others small .
every instant some died out , and others were relit , so that the little flames seemed to be jumping about in constant change .
" see ," said death , " these are the life - lights of mankind .
the large ones belong to children , the medium - sized ones to married people in their best years , and the little ones to old people .
however , even children and young people often have only a tiny candle ."
- " show me my life - light ," said the physician , thinking that it still would be very large .
death pointed to a little stump that was just threatening to go out , and said , " see , there it is ."
- " oh , dear godfather ," said the horrified physician , " light a new one for me .
do it as a favor to me , so that i can enjoy my life , and become king and the husband of the beautiful princess ."
- " i cannot ," answered death .
" one must go out before a new one is lighted ."
- " then set the old one onto a new one that will go on burning after the old one is finished ," begged the physician .
death pretended that he was going to fulfill this wish and took hold of a large new candle , but , desiring revenge , he purposely made a mistake in relighting it , and the little piece fell down and went out .
the physician immediately fell to the ground , and he too was now in the hands of death .
