there was once an old goat who had seven little ones , and was as fond of them as ever mother was of her children .
one day she had to go into the wood to fetch food for them , so she called them all round her .
" dear children ," said she , " i am going out into the wood ; and while i am gone , be on your guard against the wolf , for if he were once to get inside he would eat you up , skin , bones , and all .
the wretch often disguises himself , but he may always be known by his hoarse voice and black paws ."
- " dear mother ," answered the kids , " you need not be afraid , we will take good care of ourselves ."
and the mother bleated good - bye , and went on her way with an easy mind . it was not long before some one came knocking at the house - door , and crying out : " open the door , my dear children , your mother is come back , and has brought each of you something ."
but the little kids knew it was the wolf by the hoarse voice .
" we will not open the door ," cried they ; " you are not our mother , she has a delicate and sweet voice , and your voice is hoarse ; you must be the wolf ."
then off went the wolf to a shop and bought a big lump of chalk , and ate it up to make his voice soft .
and then he came back , knocked at the house - door , and cried : " open the door , my dear children , your mother is here , and has brought each of you something ."
but the wolf had put up his black paws against the window , and the kids seeing this , cried out , " we will not open the door ; our mother has no black paws like you ; you must be the wolf ."
the wolf then ran to a baker .
" baker ," said he , " i am hurt in the foot ; pray spread some dough over the place ."
and when the baker had plastered his feet , he ran to the miller .
" miller ," said he , " strew me some white meal over my paws ."
but the miller refused , thinking the wolf must be meaning harm to some one .
" if you don ' t do it ," cried the wolf , " i ' ll eat you up !"
and the miller was afraid and did as he was told .
and that just shows what men are . and now came the rogue the third time to the door and knocked .
" open , children !"
cried he .
" your dear mother has come home , and brought you each something from the wood ."
- " first show us your paws ," said the kids , " so that we may know if you are really our mother or not ."
and he put up his paws against the window , and when they saw that they were white , all seemed right , and they opened the door .
and when he was inside they saw it was the wolf , and they were terrified and tried to hide themselves .
one ran under the table , the second got into the bed , the third into the oven , the fourth in the kitchen , the fifth in the cupboard , the sixth under the sink , the seventh in the clock - case .
but the wolf found them all , and gave them short shrift ; one after the other he swallowed down , all but the youngest , who was hid in the clock - case .
and so the wolf , having got what he wanted , strolled forth into the green meadows , and laying himself down under a tree , he fell asleep . not long after , the mother goat came back from the wood ; and , oh !
what a sight met her eyes !
the door was standing wide open , table , chairs , and stools , all thrown about , dishes broken , quilt and pillows torn off the bed .
she sought her children , they were nowhere to be found .
she called to each of them by name , but nobody answered , until she came to the name of the youngest .
" here i am , mother ," a little voice cried , " here , in the clock case ."
and so she helped him out , and heard how the wolf had come , and eaten all the rest .
and you may think how she cried for the loss of her dear children . at last in her grief she wandered out of doors , and the youngest kid with her ; and when they came into the meadow , there they saw the wolf lying under a tree , and snoring so that the branches shook .
the mother goat looked at him carefully on all sides and she noticed how something inside his body was moving and struggling .
dear me !
thought she , can it be that my poor children that he devoured for his evening meal are still alive ?
and she sent the little kid back to the house for a pair of shears , and needle , and thread .
then she cut the wolf ' s body open , and no sooner had she made one snip than out came the head of one of the kids , and then another snip , and then one after the other the six little kids all jumped out alive and well , for in his greediness the rogue had swallowed them down whole .
how delightful this was !
so they comforted their dear mother and hopped about like tailors at a wedding .
" now fetch some good hard stones ," said the mother , " and we will fill his body with them , as he lies asleep ."
and so they fetched some in all haste , and put them inside him , and the mother sewed him up so quickly again that he was none the wiser . when the wolf at last awoke , and got up , the stones inside him made him feel very thirsty , and as he was going to the brook to drink , they struck and rattled one against another .
and so he cried out :" what is this i feel inside meknocking hard against my bones ? how should such a thing betide me ! they were kids , and now they ' re stones ."
so he came to the brook , and stooped to drink , but the heavy stones weighed him down , so he fell over into the water and was drowned .
and when the seven little kids saw it they came up running .
" the wolf is dead , the wolf is dead !"
they cried , and taking hands , they danced with their mother all about the place .
