long time ago , perhaps as much as two thousand years , there was a rich man , and he had a beautiful and pious wife , and they loved each other very much , and they had no children , though they wished greatly for some , and the wife prayed for one day and night .
now , in the courtyard in front of their house stood an almond tree ; and one day in winter the wife was standing beneath it , and paring an apple , and as she pared it she cut her finger , and the blood fell upon the snow .
" ah ," said the woman , sighing deeply , and looking down at the blood , " if only i could have a child as red as blood , and as white as snow !"
and as she said these words , her heart suddenly grew light , and she felt sure she should have her wish .
so she went back to the house , and when a month had passed the snow was gone ; in two months everything was green ; in three months the flowers sprang out of the earth ; in four months the trees were in full leaf , and the branches were thickly entwined ; the little birds began to sing , so that the woods echoed , and the blossoms fell from the trees ; when the fifth month had passed the wife stood under the almond tree , and it smelt so sweet that her heart leaped within her , and she fell on her knees for joy ; and when the sixth month had gone , the fruit was thick and fine , and she remained still ; and the seventh month she gathered the almonds , and ate them eagerly , and was sick and sorrowful ; and when the eighth month had passed she called to her husband , and said , weeping , " if i die , bury me under the almond tree ."
then she was comforted and happy until the ninth month had passed , and then she bore a child as white as snow and as red as blood , and when she saw it her joy was so great that she died . her husband buried her under the almond tree , and he wept sore ; time passed , and he became less sad ; and after he had grieved a little more he left off , and then he took another wife . his second wife bore him a daughter , and his first wife ' s child was a son , as red as blood and as white as snow .
whenever the wife looked at her daughter she felt great love for her , but whenever she looked at the little boy , evil thoughts came into her heart , of how she could get all her husband ' s money for her daughter , and how the boy stood in the way ; and so she took great hatred to him , and drove him from one corner to another , and gave him a buffet here and a cuff there , so that the poor child was always in disgrace ; when he came back after school hours there was no peace for him .
once , when the wife went into the room upstairs , her little daughter followed her , and said , " mother , give me an apple ."
- " yes , my child ," said the mother , and gave her a fine apple out of the chest , and the chest had a great heavy lid with a strong iron lock .
" mother ," said the little girl , " shall not my brother have one too ?"
that was what the mother expected , and she said , " yes , when he comes back from school ."
and when she saw from the window that he was coming , an evil thought crossed her mind , and she snatched the apple , and took it from her little daughter , saying , " you shall not have it before your brother ."
then she threw the apple into the chest , and shut to the lid .
then the little boy came in at the door , and she said to him in a kind tone , but with evil looks , " my son , will you have an apple ?"
- " mother ," said the boy , " how terrible you look !
yes , give me an apple !"
then she spoke as kindly as before , holding up the cover of the chest , " come here and take out one for yourself ."
and as the boy was stooping over the open chest , crash went the lid down , so that his head flew off among the red apples .
but then the woman felt great terror , and wondered how she could escape the blame .
and she went to the chest of drawers in her bedroom and took a white handkerchief out of the nearest drawer , and fitting the head to the neck , she bound them with the handkerchief , so that nothing should be seen , and set him on a chair before the door with the apple in his hand . then came little marjory into the kitchen to her mother , who was standing before the fire stirring a pot of hot water .
" mother ," said marjory , " my brother is sitting before the door and he has an apple in his hand , and looks very pale ; i asked him to give me the apple , but he did not answer me ; it seems very strange ."
- " go again to him ," said the mother , " and if he will not answer you , give him a box on the ear ."
so marjory went again and said , " brother , give me the apple ."
but as he took no notice , she gave him a box on the ear , and his head fell off , at which she was greatly terrified , and began to cry and scream , and ran to her mother , and said , " o mother . 1 i have knocked my brother ' s head off !"
and cried and screamed , and would not cease .
" o marjory !"
said her mother , " what have you done ?
but keep quiet , that no one may see there is anything the matter ; it can ' t be helped now ; we will put him out of the way safely .
" when the father came home and sat down to table , he said , " where is my son ?"
but the mother was filling a great dish full of black broth , and marjory was crying bitterly , for she could not refrain .
then the father said again , " where is my son ?"
- " oh ," said the mother , " he is gone into the country to his great - uncle ' s to stay for a little while ."
- " what should he go for ?"
said the father , " and without bidding me good - bye , too !"
- " oh , he wanted to go so much , and he asked me to let him stay there six weeks ; he will be well taken care of ."
- " dear me ," said the father , " i am quite sad about it ; it was not right of him to go without bidding me good - bye ."
with that he began to eat , saying , " marjory , what are you crying for ?
your brother will come back some time ."
after a while he said , " well , wife , the food is very good ; give me some more ."
and the more he ate the more he wanted , until he had eaten it all up , and be threw the bones under the table .
then marjory went to her chest of drawers , and took one of her best handkerchiefs from the bottom drawer , and picked up all the bones from under the table and tied them up in her handkerchief , and went out at the door crying bitterly .
she laid them in the green grass under the almond tree , and immediately her heart grew light again , and she wept no more .
then the almond tree began to wave to and fro , and the boughs drew together and then parted , just like a clapping of hands for joy ; then a cloud rose from the tree , and in the midst of the cloud there burned a fire , and out of the fire a beautiful bird arose , and , singing most sweetly , soared high into the air ; and when he had flown away , the almond tree remained as it was before , but the handkerchief full of bones was gone .
marjory felt quite glad and light - hearted , just as if her brother were still alive .
so she went back merrily into the house and had her dinner .
the bird , when it flew away , perched on the roof of a goldsmith ' s house , and began to sing ,'' it was my mother who murdered me ; it was my father who ate of me ; it was my sister marjorywho all my bones in pieces found ; hem in a handkerchief she bound , and laid them under the almond tree . kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i cry , oh what a beautiful bird am i !
" the goldsmith was sitting in his shop making a golden chain , and when he heard the bird , who was sitting on his roof and singing , he started up to go and look , and as he passed over his threshold he lost one of his slippers ; and he went into the middle of the street with a slipper on one foot and - only a sock on the other ; with his apron on , and the gold chain in one hand and the pincers in the other ; and so he stood in the sunshine looking up at the bird .
" bird ," said he , " how beautifully you sing ; do sing that piece over again ."
- " no ," said the bird , " i do not sing for nothing twice ; if you will give me that gold chain i will sing again ."
- " very well ," said the goldsmith , " here is the gold chain ; now do as you said ."
down came the bird and took the gold chain in his right claw , perched in front of the goldsmith , and sang ," it was my mother who murdered me ; it was my father who ate of me ; it was my sister marjorywho all my bones in pieces found ; them in a handkerchief she bound , and laid them under the almond tree . kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i cry , oh what a beautiful bird am i !
" then the bird flew to a shoemaker ' s , and perched on his roof , and sang ," it was my mother who murdered me ; it was my father who ate of me ; it was my sister marjorywho all my bones in pieces found ; them in a handkerchief she bound , and laid them under the almond tree . kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i cry , oh what a beautiful bird am i !
" when the shoemaker heard , he ran out of his door in his shirt sleeves and looked up at the roof of his house , holding his hand to shade his eyes from the sun .
" bird ," said he , " how beautifully you sing !"
then he called in at his door , " wife , come out directly ; here is a bird singing beautifully ; only listen ."
then he called his daughter , all his children , and acquaintance , both young men and maidens , and they came up the street and gazed on the bird , and saw how beautiful it was with red and green feathers , and round its throat was as it were gold , and its eyes twinkled in its head like stars .
" bird ," said the shoemaker , " do sing that piece over again ."
- " no ," said the bird , " i may not sing for nothing twice ; you must give me something ."
- " wife ," said the man , " go into the shop ; on the top shelf stands a pair of red shoes ; bring them here ."
so the wife went and brought the shoes .
" now bird ," said the man , " sing us that piece again ."
and the bird came down and took the shoes in his left claw , and flew up again to the roof , and sang ," it was my mother who murdered me ; it was my father who ate of me ; it was my sister marjorywho all my bones in pieces found ; hem in a handkerchief she bound , and laid them under the almond tree . kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i ciy , oh what a beautiful bird am i !
" and when he had finished he flew away , with the chain in his right claw and the shoes in his left claw , and he flew till he reached a mill , and the mill went " clip - clap , clip - clap , clip - clap ."
and in the mill sat twenty millers - men hewing a millstone - " hick - hack , hick - hack , hick - hack ," while the mill was going " clip - clap , clip - clap , clip - clap ."
and the bird perched on a linden tree that stood in front of the mill , and sang , " it was my mother who murdered me ; " here one of the men looked up .
" it was my father who ate of me ;" then two more looked up and listened .
" it was my sister marjory " here four more looked up .
" who all my bones in pieces found ; them in a handkerchief she bound ," now there were only eight left hewing .
" and laid them under the almond tree ."
now only five .
" kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i cry ," now only one .
" oh what a beautiful bird am i !"
at length the last one left off , and he only heard the end .
" bird ," said he , " how beautifully you sing ; let me hear it all ; sing that again !"
- " no ," said the bird , " i may not sing it twice for nothing ; if you will give me the millstone i will sing it again ."
- " indeed ," said the man , " if it belonged to me alone you should have it ."
- " all right ," said the others , " if he sings again he shall have it ."
then the bird came down , and all the twenty millers heaved up the stone with poles - " yo !
heave - ho !
yo !
heave - ho !"
and the bird stuck his head through the hole in the middle , and with the millstone round his neck he flew up to the tree and sang ," it was my mother who murdered me ; it was my father who ate of me ; it was my sister marjorywho all my bones in pieces found ; them in a handkerchief she bound , and laid them under the almond tree . kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i cry , oh what a beautiful bird am i !
" and when he had finished , he spread his wings ,, having in the right claw the chain , and in the left claw the shoes , and round his neck the millstone , and he flew away to his father ' s house . in the parlour sat the father , the mother , and marjory at the table ; the father said , " how light - hearted and cheerful i feel ."
- " nay ," said the mother , " i feel very low , just as if a great storm were coming ."
but marjory sat weeping ; and the bird came flying , and perched on the roof " oh ," said the father , " i feel so joyful , and the sun is shining so bright ; it is as if i were going to meet with an old friend ."
- " nay ," said the wife , " i am terrified , my teeth chatter , and there is fire in my veins ," and she tore open her dress to get air ; and marjory sat in a corner and wept , with her plate before her , until it was quite full of tears .
then the bird perched on the almond tree , and sang , '' it was my mother who murdered me ; " and the mother stopped her ears and hid her eyes , and would neither see nor hear ; nevertheless , the noise of a fearful storm was in her ears , and in her eyes a quivering and burning as of lightning .
" it was my father who ate of me ;'' " o mother !"
said the - father , " there is a beautiful bird singing so finely , and the sun shines , and everything smells as sweet as cinnamon .
'' it was my sister marjory " marjory hid her face in her lap and wept , and the father said , " i must go out to see the bird ."
- " oh do not go !"
said the wife , " i feel as if the house were on fire ."
but the man went out and looked at the bird .
" who all my bones in pieces found ; them in a handkerchief she bound , and laid them under the almond tree .
kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i cry , oh what a beautiful bird am i !
" with that the bird let fall the gold chain upon his father ' s neck , and it fitted him exactly .
so he went indoors and said , " look what a beautiful chain the bird has given me ."
then his wife was so terrified that she fell all along on the floor , and her cap came off .
then the bird began again to sing , " it was my mother who murdered me ;" - " oh ," groaned the mother , " that i were a thousand fathoms under ground , so as not to be obliged to hear it ."
- " it was my father who ate of me ;" then the woman lay as if she were dead .
" it was my sister marjory " - " oh ," said marjory , " i will go out , too , and see if the bird will give me anything ."
and so she went .
" who all my bones in pieces found ; them in a handkerchief she bound ," then he threw the shoes down to her .
" and laid them under the almond tree .
kywitt , kywitt , kywitt , i cry , oh what a beautiful bird am i !
" and poor marjory all at once felt happy and joyful , and put on her red shoes , and danced and jumped for joy .
" oh dear ," said she , " i felt so sad before i went outside , and now my heart is so light !
he is a charming bird to have given me a pair of red shoes ."
but the mother ' s hair stood on end , and looked like flame , and she said , " even if the world is coming to an end , i must go out for a little relief ."
just as she came outside the door , crash went the millstone on her head , and crushed her flat .
the father and daughter rushed out , and saw smoke and flames of fire rise up ; but when that had gone by , there stood the little brother ; and he took his father and marjory by the hand , and they felt very happy and content , and went indoors , and sat to the table , and had their dinner .
