there was once a schoolmistress who was a widow , and had a daughter who was very plain .
this mistress had a pupil who was very pretty , and the daughter of a traveler .
the mistress was very attached to her father , and every day would beg the girl to ask him to marry her , promising to give her porridge made with honey . the girl went home to ask her father to marry her schoolmistress , as she would then give her porridge made with honey .
to this request the father replied that he would not marry her , for he well knew that though she said now that she would give her porridge made with honey , later on she would give her porridge with gall .
yet , as the child began to cry , begging her father to consent , the father , who loved his child very much , in order to comfort her , replied that he would order a pair of boots to be made of iron , and hang them up until the boots would rust to pieces with age , when he would marry the mistress . the little girl , very pleased to hear this , went immediately to tell the mistress , who then instructed her pupil to wet the boots every day .
the little girl did so , and after a while the boots fell to pieces , and she went and told her father of it .
he then said that he would marry the mistress , and on the following day married her . so long as the father was at home the child was treated with kindness and affection , but the moment he went out the mistress was very unkind to her , and treated her badly .
she one day sent her to graze a cow , and gave her a loaf , which she desired her to bring back whole , and an earthen pot with water , out of which she expected her to drink , and yet was to bring back full .
one day the mistress told the girl that she wished her to employ herself in winding some skeins of thread until the evening .
the little girl went away crying and bewailing her lot ; but the cow comforted her , and told her not to be distressed , -- to fix the skein on her horns and unravel the thread .
the good cow after that took out all the crumb from the loaf by making a small hole with one of her horns , and then stopped the aperture , and gave the girl the loaf back again entire . in the evening the girl returned home .
when her stepmother saw that she had finished her task , and brought all the thread ready wound , she was very vexed and wanted to beat her , saying that she was sure the cow had had something to do with it , and next day ordered the animal to be killed .
at this the girl began to cry very bitterly , but the step - mother told her that she would have to clean and wash the cow ' s entrails in a tank they had , however grieved she might feel for the loss of the animal . the cow , however , again told the girl not to be troubled , but to go and wash her entrails , but was to be careful to save whatever she saw come out of them .
the girl did so , and when she was cleaning them she saw a ball of gold come out and fall into the water .
the girl went into the tank to search for it , and there she saw a house with everything in it in disorder , and she began to arrange and make the house look tidy .
she suddenly heard footsteps , and in her hurry she hid herself behind the door . the fairies entered and began to look about , and a dog came in also with them , and went up to where she was and began to bark , saying : " bow , bow , bow , behind the door hides somebody who did us good , and will yet render us more services .
bow , bow , bow , behind the door hides somebody who has done us good , and will yet render us more services .
" the fairies , as they searched about , hearing the dog bark , discovered where the girl was hiding , and began to say to her , " we endow you by the power we possess with the gift of beauty , making you the most lovely maiden ever seen .
" the next fairy then said , " i cast a sweet spell over you , so that when you open } our mouth to speak , pearls and gold shall drop from your lips .
" the third fairy coming forward said , " i endow you with every blessing , making you the happiest maiden in the world .
take this wand , it will grant you whatever you may ask .
" the girl then left the enchanted region , and returned home , and as soon as the mistress ' s daughter saw her approach she commenced to cry out to her mother to come quickly and see the hearth - cat , who had come back at last .
the mistress ran to greet her , and asked her where and what she had been doing all that time . the girl related the contrary of what she had seen , as the fairies had instructed her to do : that she had found a tidy house , and that she had disarranged everything in it , to make it look untidy . the mistress sent her own daughter there , and she had hardly arrived at the house when she began at once to do as her half - sister had told her ; she disarranged everything , to make the house look untidy and uncared for .
and when she heard the fairies coming in she hid behind the door . the little dog saw her , and barking at her said , " behind the door stands one who has done us much harm , and will still continue to molest us .
bow , bow , bow , behind the door stands one who has done us much harm , and will continue to molest us on the first opportunity .
" the fairies hearing this approached her , and one began to say , " i throw a spell over you which will render you the ugliest maid that can be found .
" the next one took up the word and said , " i bewitch you , so that when you attempt to speak all manner of filth shall fall out of your mouth .
" and the third fairy said , " i also bewitch you , and you shall become the poorest and most wretched maid in existence .
" the mistress ' s daughter returned home , thinking she was looking quite a beauty ; but when she came up close to her mother , and began to speak , the mother burst out crying on seeing her own daughter so disfigured and wretched .
full of rage , she sent her step - daughter to the kitchen , saying , that she was the hearth - cat , and that she should take care that she kept there , as the only place which was fit for her . on a certain day the mistress and her daughter repaired to some races which were then taking place , but when the girl saw that they had left the house , she asked her divining rod to give her a very handsome dress , boots , a hat , and everything complete .
she dressed and adorned herself with all she had , and went to the races , and stood in front of the royal stand . the mistress ' s daughter instantly saw her , and began to exclaim and cry out at the top of her voice , in the midst of all the people present , saying , " oh !
mother , mother , that beautiful maiden over there is our very hearth - cat .
" the mother , to quiet her , told her to be calm ; that the maiden was not her step - sister , as she had remained at home under lock and key .
the races were hardly over when the girl departed home ; but the king , who had seen her , was in love with her . the moment the mother reached home she asked the hearth - cat whether she had been out .
she replied , that she had not ; and showed her face besmeared with smut . next day the girl asked the wand to strike and give her another dress which would be more splendid than the previous one .
she put on her things and repaired to the races .
the moment the king perceived her he felt very pleased indeed ; but the races were hardly concluded than she retired in haste , and went into her carriage and drove home , leaving the king more in love than ever with her . the third day the girl asked the divining rod to give her a garment which should surpass the other two in richness and beauty , and other shoes ; and she went and attended the races .
when the king saw her , he was delighted , but was again disappointed to see her depart before the races were concluded .
in her hurry to enter her carriage quickly , she let fall one of her slippers .
the king picked it up and returned to the palace , and fell lovesick . the slipper had some letters upon it which said , " this shoe will only fit its owner .
" the whole kingdom was searched to find the lady whose foot would be found to fit the slipper exactly , yet no one was found .
the schoolmistress went to the palace to try the slipper on , but all her efforts were in vain .
after her , her daughter followed , and endeavored her best to fit the slipper on , but with no better success .
there only remained the hearthcat . the king inquired who was the next to try on the slipper , and asked the mistress if there was any other lady left in her house who could fit on the slipper . the schoolmistress then said that there only remained a hearth - cat in her house , but that she had never worn such a slipper .
the king ordered the girl to be brought to the palace , and the mistress had no alternative but to do so .
the king himself insisted on trying the slipper on the girl ' s foot , and the moment she put her little foot into the slipper and drew it on , it fitted exactly .
the king then arranged that she should remain in the palace and married her .
and he ordered the mistress and her daughter to be put to death .
