a woman who has married a widower ill - treats his daughter , giving her dirtiest work to do , and keeping her always amongst the ashes , so that she is nicknamed cinderella .
she pets and pampers her own two ugly daughters , and dresses them richly .
cinderella , who is also called the fire - blower , on account of her occupation , is very beautiful , patient , and good .-- one day she has to pick a sack of canary - seed whilst stepmother and stepsisters are out .
unable to finish the task , she begins to cry , when a little old woman , very old and very little , suddenly appears , gives her an almond , and performs task for her .-- heroine breaks the almond , and , finding inside a dress of shining gold , dons it and goes to church , where she is admired by all , even the king ' s son .
before the service is finished she goes home and resumes her rags .
stepmother and stepsisters return , and tell her of the lovely girl in dress of shining gold whom she would have seen had she been to church .
heroine says :" maybe , no ; and yes , maybe ; maybe that fair maid was me !
"" listen to cinderella !
be off , and blow the fire !"
and they drive her away to the ashes .-- next day she has a whole sack of beans to shell .
she sets to work , but , failing at the task , is very downcast , when again little old woman appears , performs it for her , and gives her a filbert .-- heroine breaks it , and finds inside a silver dress , donning which she goes to the promenade , where all admire her .
when she leaves , king ' s son sends his pages everywhere in search of her .
stepmother and stepsisters return , and tell her of lovely girl at the promenade heroine replies as before , and is driven off to the cinders .-- another day she has a sack of rice to pick while step mother and stepsisters go off to ball given by king ' s son .
she cries ; little old woman comes to perform task , and gives her a walnut , containing a robe of bells .-- clad in this heroine goes to ball , making all the ladies turn green with envy .
king ' s son recognises her , dances with none other , and they are so engrossed that heroine does not notice that ball is over , and has to run home as fast as she can .
stepmother and stepsisters tease her as before , and she makes same remark .-- in her haste to leave , heroine had dropped a glass slipper on the stair , and had not time to pick it up .
servants take it to king ' s son , who , suspecting its owner , proclaims that he will wed whomsoever it fits .
it is tried on all the ladies , but it is too small for everyone ; pages take it from house to house in vain .
at last they come to cinderella ' s house .
the slipper is tried on stepsisters , but will not fit them .-- pages are leaving in despair , and think to inquire if there is another girl in the house .
stepmother admits that there is , but she never stirs from the cinders .
pages send for her , and slipper fits her so perfectly that they take her off to palace , where king ' s son recognises her and marries her .
