a king had a daughter who was beautiful beyond all measure , but so proud and haughty withal that no suitor was good enough for her .
she sent away one after the other , and ridiculed them as well . once the king made a great feast and invited thereto , from far and near , all the young men likely to marry .
they were all marshalled in a row according to their rank and standing ; first came the kings , then the grand - dukes , then the princes , the earls , the barons , and the gentry .
then the king ' s daughter was led through the ranks , but to every one she had some objection to make ; one was too fat , " the wine - cask ," she said .
another was too tall , " long and thin has little in ."
the third was too short , " short and thick is never quick ."
the fourth was too pale , " as pale as death ."
the fifth too red , " a fighting - cock ."
the sixth was not straight enough , " a green log dried behind the stove .
" so she had something to say against every one , but she made herself especially merry over a good king who stood quite high up in the row , and whose chin had grown a little crooked .
" well ," she cried and laughed , " he has a chin like a thrush ' s beak !"
and from that time he got the name of king thrushbeard . but the old king , when he saw that his daugher did nothing but mock the people , and despised all the suitors who were gathered there , was very angry , and swore that she should have for her husband the very first beggar that came to his doors . a few days afterwards a fiddler came and sang beneath the windows , trying to earn a small alms .
when the king heard him he said , " let him come up ."
so the fiddler came in , in his dirty , ragged clothes , and sang before the king and his daughter , and when he had ended he asked for a trifling gift .
the king said , " your song has pleased me so well that i will give you my daughter there , to wife .
" the king ' s daughter shuddered , but the king said , " i have taken an oath to give you to the very first beggar - man , and i will keep it ."
all she could say was in vain ; the priest was brought , and she had to let herself be wedded to the fiddler on the spot .
when that was done the king said , " now it is not proper for you , a beggar - woman , to stay any longer in my palace , you may just go away with your husband .
" the beggar - man led her out by the hand , and she was obliged to walk away on foot with him .
when they came to a large forest she asked , " to whom does that beautiful forest belong ?"
- " it belongs to king thrushbeard ; if you had taken him , it would have been yours ."
- " ah , unhappy girl that i am , if i had but taken king thrushbeard !
" afterwards they came to a meadow , and she asked again , " to whom does this beautiful green meadow belong ?"
- " it belongs to king thrushbeard ; if you had taken him , it would have been yours ."
- " ah , unhappy girl that i am , if i had but taken king thrushbeard !
" then they came to a large town , and she asked again , " to whom does this fine large town belong ?"
- " it belongs to king thrushbeard ; if you had taken him , it would have been yours ."
- " ah , unhappy girl that i am , if i had but taken king thrushbeard !
"" it does not please me ," said the fiddler , " to hear you always wishing for another husband ; am i not good enough for you ?"
at last they came to a very little hut , and she said , " oh goodness !
what a small house ; to whom does this miserable , mean hovel belong ?"
the fiddler answered , " that is my house and yours , where we shall live together .
" she had to stoop in order to go in at the low door .
" where are the servants ?"
said the king ' s daughter .
" what servants ?"
answered the beggar - man ; " you must yourself do what you wish to have done .
just make a fire at once , and set on water to cook my supper , i am quite tired ."
but the king ' s daughter knew nothing about lighting fires or cooking , and the beggar - man had to lend a hand himself to get anything fairly done .
when they had finished their scanty meal they went to bed ; but he forced her to get up quite early in the morning in order to look after the house . for a few days they lived in this way as well as might be , and came to the end of all their provisions .
then the man said , " wife , we cannot go on any longer eating and drinking here and earning nothing .
you weave baskets ."
he went out , cut some willows , and brought them home .
then she began to weave , but the tough willows wounded her delicate hands .
" i see that this will not do ," said the man ; " you had better spin , perhaps you can do that better ."
she sat down and tried to spin , but the hard thread soon cut her soft fingers so that the blood ran down .
" see ," said the man , " you are fit for no sort of work ; i have made a bad bargain with you .
now i will try to make a business with pots and earthenware ; you must sit in the market - place and sell the ware ."
- " alas ," thought she , " if any of the people from my father ' s kingdom come to the market and see me sitting there , selling , how they will mock me ?"
but it was of no use , she had to yield unless she chose to die of hunger . for the first time she succeeded well , for the people were glad to buy the woman ' s wares because she was good - looking , and they paid her what she asked ; many even gave her the money and left the pots with her as well .
so they lived on what she had earned as long as it lasted , then the husband bought a lot of new crockery .
with this she sat down at the corner of the market - place , and set it out round about her ready for sale .
but suddenly there came a drunken hussar galloping along , and he rode right amongst the pots so that they were all broken into a thousand bits .
she began to weep , and did now know what to do for fear .
" alas !
what will happen to me ?"
cried she ; " what will my husband say to this ?
" she ran home and told him of the misfortune .
" who would seat herself at a corner of the market - place with crockery ?"
said the man ; " leave off crying , i see very well that you cannot do any ordinary work , so i have been to our king ' s palace and have asked whether they cannot find a place for a kitchen - maid , and they have promised me to take you ; in that way you will get your food for nothing .
" the king ' s daughter was now a kitchen - maid , and had to be at the cook ' s beck and call , and do the dirtiest work .
in both her pockets she fastened a little jar , in which she took home her share of the leavings , and upon this they lived . it happened that the wedding of the king ' s eldest son was to be celebrated , so the poor woman went up and placed herself by the door of the hall to look on .
when all the candles were lit , and people , each more beautiful than the other , entered , and all was full of pomp and splendour , she thought of her lot with a sad heart , and cursed the pride and haughtiness which had humbled her and brought her to so great poverty . the smell of the delicious dishes which were being taken in and out reached her , and now and then the servants threw her a few morsels of them : these she put in her jars to take home . all at once the king ' s son entered , clothed in velvet and silk , with gold chains about his neck .
and when he saw the beautiful woman standing by the door he seized her by the hand , and would have danced with her ; but she refused and shrank with fear , for she saw that it was king thrushbeard , her suitor whom she had driven away with scorn .
her struggles were of no avail , he drew her into the hall ; but the string by which her pockets were hung broke , the pots fell down , the soup ran out , and the scraps were scattered all about .
and when the people saw it , there arose general laughter and derision , and she was so ashamed that she would rather have been a thousand fathoms below the ground .
she sprang to the door and would have run away , but on the stairs a man caught her and brought her back ; and when she looked at him it was king thrushbeard again .
he said to her kindly , " do not be afraid , i and the fiddler who has been living with you in that wretched hovel are one .
for love of you i disguised myself so ; and i also was the hussar who rode through your crockery .
this was all done to humble your proud spirit , and to punish you for the insolence with which you mocked me .
" then she wept bitterly and said , " i have done great wrong , and am not worthy to be your wife ."
but he said , " be comforted , the evil days are past ; now we will celebrate our wedding ."
then the maids - in - waiting came and put on her the most splendid clothing , and her father and his whole court came and wished her happiness in her marriage with king thrushbeard , and the joy now began in earnest .
i wish you and i had been there too .
