in old times when wishing still helped one , there lived a king whose daughters were all beautiful , but the youngest was so beautiful that the sun itself , which has seen so much , was astonished whenever it shone in her face .
close by the king ' s castle lay a great dark forest , and under an old lime - tree in the forest was a well , and when the day was very warm , the king ' s child went out into the forest and sat down by the side of the cool fountain , and when she was dull she took a golden ball , and threw it up on high and caught it , and this ball was her favourite plaything . now it so happened that on one occasion the princess ' s golden ball did not fall into the little hand which she was holding up for it , but on to the ground beyond , and rolled straight into the water .
the king ' s daughter followed it with her eyes , but it vanished , and the well was deep , so deep that the bottom could not be seen .
on this she began to cry , and cried louder and louder , and could not be comforted .
and as she thus lamented , some one said to her , " what ails thee , king ' s daughter ?
thou weepest so that even a stone would show pity ."
she looked round to the side from whence the voice came , and saw a frog stretching forth its thick , ugly head from the water .
" ah !
old water - splasher , is it thou ?"
said she ; " i am weeping for my golden ball , which has fallen into the well .
"" be quiet , and do not weep ," answered the frog , " i can help thee , but what wilt thou give me if i bring thy plaything up again ?"
" whatever thou wilt have , dear frog ," said she " my clothes , my pearls and jewels , and even the golden crown which i am wearing .
" the frog answered , " i do not care for thy clothes , thy pearls and jewels , or thy golden crown , but if thou wilt love me and let me be thy companion and play - fellow , and sit by thee at thy little table , and eat off thy little golden plate , and drink out of thy little cup , and sleep in thy little bed if thou wilt promise me this i will go down below , and bring thee thy golden ball up again .
"" oh , yes ," said she , " i promise thee all thou wishest , if thou wilt but bring me my ball back again ."
she , however , thought , " how the silly frog does talk !
he lives in the water with the other frogs and croaks , and can be no companion to any human being !
" but the frog when he had received this promise , put his head into the water and sank down , and in a short time came swimming up again with the ball in his mouth , and threw it on the grass .
the king ' s daughter was delighted to see her pretty plaything once more , and picked it up , and ran away with it .
" wait , wait ," said the frog , " take me with thee .
i can ' t run as thou canst ."
but what did it avail him to scream his croak , croak , after her , as loudly as he could ?
she did not listen to it , but ran home and soon forgot the poor frog , who was forced to go back into his well again . the next day when she had seated herself at table with the king and all the courtiers , and was eating from her little golden plate , something came creeping splish splash , splish splash , up the marble staircase , and when it had got to the top , it knocked at the door and cried , " princess , youngest princess , open the door for me ."
she ran to see who was outside , but when she opened the door , there sat the frog in front of it .
then she slammed the door to , in great haste , sat down to dinner again , and was quite frightened .
the king saw plainly that her heart was beating violently , and said , " my child , what art thou so afraid of ?
is there perchance a giant outside who wants to carry thee away ?"
" ah , no ," replied she , " it is no giant , but a disgusting frog .
"" what does the frog want with thee ?"
" ah , dear father , yesterday when i was in the forest sitting by the well , playing , my golden ball fell into the water .
and because i cried so the frog brought it out again for me , and because he insisted so on it , i promised him he should be my companion , but i never thought he would be able to come out of his water !
and now he is outside there , and wants to come in to me .
" in the meantime it knocked a second time , and cried ," princess !
youngest princess ! open the door for me ! dost thou not know what thou saidst to meyesterday by the cool waters of the fountain ? princess , youngest princess ! open the door for me !
" then said the king , " that which thou hast promised must thou perform .
go and let him in ."
she went and opened the door , and the frog hopped in and followed her , step by step , to her chair .
there he sat still and cried , " lift me up beside thee ."
she delayed , until at last the king commanded her to do it .
when the frog was once on the chair he wanted to be on the table , and when he was on the table he said , " now , push thy little golden plate nearer to me that we may eat together ."
she did this , but it was easy to see that she did not do it willingly .
the frog enjoyed what he ate , but almost every mouthful she took choked her .
at length he said , " i have eaten and am satisfied ; now i am tired , carry me into thy little room and make thy little silken bed ready , and we will both lie down and go to sleep .
" the king ' s daughter began to cry , for she was afraid of the cold frog which she did not like to touch , and which was now to sleep in her pretty , clean little bed .
but the king grew angry and said , " he who helped thee when thou wert in trouble ought not afterwards to be despised by thee ."
so she took hold of the frog with two fingers , carried him upstairs , and put him in a corner .
but when she was in bed he crept to her and said , " i am tired , i want to sleep as well as thou , lift me up or i will tell thy father ."
then she was terribly angry , and took him up and threw him with all her might against the wall .
" now , thou wilt be quiet , odious frog ," said she .
but when he fell down he was no frog but a king ' s son with beautiful kind eyes .
he by her father ' s will was now her dear companion and husband .
then he told her how he had been bewitched by a wicked witch , and how no one could have delivered him from the well but herself , and that to - morrow they would go together into his kingdom .
then they went to sleep , and next morning when the sun awoke them , a carriage came driving up with eight white horses , which had white ostrich feathers on their heads , and were harnessed with golden chains , and behind stood the young king ' s servant faithful henry .
faithful henry had been so unhappy when his master was changed into a frog , that he had caused three iron bands to be laid round his heart , lest it should burst with grief andsadness .
the carriage was to conduct the young king into his kingdom .
faithful henry helped them both in , and placed himself behind again , and was full of joy because of this deliverance .
and when they had driven a part of the way , the king ' s son heard a cracking behind him as if something had broken .
so he turned round and cried , " henry , the carriage is breaking .
"" no , master , it is not the carriage .
it is a band from my heart , which was put there in my great pain when you were a frog and imprisoned in the well ."
again and once again while they were on their way something cracked , and each time the king ' s son thought the carriage was breaking ; but it was only the bands which were springing from the heart of faithful henry because his master was set free and was happy .
