hard by a great forest dwelt a wood - cutter with his wife , who had an only child , a little girl three years old .
they were , however , so poor that they no longer had daily bread , and did not know how to get food for her .
one morning the wood - cutter went out sorrowfully to his work in the forest , and while he was cutting wood , suddenly there stood before him a tall and beautiful woman with a crown of shining stars on her head , who said to him , " i am the virgin mary , mother of the child jesus .
thou art poor and needy , bring thy child to me , i will take her with me and be her mother , and care for her ."
the wood - cutter obeyed , brought his child , and gave her to the virgin mary , who took her up to heaven with her .
there the child fared well , ate sugar - cakes , and drank sweet milk , and her clothes were of gold , and the little angels played with her .
and when she was fourteen years of age , the virgin mary called her one day and said , " dear child , i am about to make a long journey , so take into thy keeping the keys of the thirteen doors of heaven .
twelve of these thou mayest open , and behold the glory which is within them , but the thirteenth , to which this little key belongs , is forbidden thee .
beware of opening it , or thou wilt bring misery on thyself ."
the girl promised to be obedient , and when the virgin mary was gone , she began to examine the dwellings of the kingdom of heaven .
each day she opened one of them , until she had made the round of the twelve .
in each of them sat one of the apostles in the midst of a great light , and she rejoiced in all the magnificence and splendour , and the little angels who always accompanied her rejoiced with her .
then the forbidden door alone remained , and she felt a great desire to know what could be hidden behind it , and said to the angels , " i will not quite open it , and i will not go inside it , but i will unlock it so that we can just see a little through the opening ."
" oh , no ," said the little angels , " that would be a sin .
the virgin mary has forbidden it , and it might easily cause thy unhappiness ."
then she was silent , but the desire in her heart was not stilled , but gnawed there and tormented her , and let her have no rest .
and once when the angels had all gone out , she thought , " now i am quite alone , and i could peep in .
if i do it , no one will ever know ."
she sought out the key , and when she had got it in her hand , she put it in the lock , and when she had put it in , she turned it round as well .
then the door sprang open , and she saw there the trinity sitting in fire and splendour .
she stayed there awhile , and looked at everything in amazement ; then she touched the light a little with her finger , and her finger became quite golden .
immediately a great fear fell on her .
she shut the door violently , and ran away .
her terror too would not quit her , let her do what she might , and her heart beat continually and would not be still ; the gold too stayed on her finger , and would not go away , let her rub it and wash it never so much . it was not long before the virgin mary came back from her journey .
she called the girl before her , and asked to have the keys of heaven back .
when the maiden gave her the bunch , the virgin looked into her eyes and said , " hast thou not opened the thirteenth door also ?"
" no ," she replied .
then she laid her hand on the girl ' s heart , and felt how it beat and beat , and saw right well that she had disobeyed her order and had opened the door .
then she said once again , " art thou certain that thou hast not done it ?"
" yes ," said the girl , for the second time .
then she perceived the finger which had become golden from touching the fire of heaven , and saw well that the child had sinned , and said for the third time , " hast thou not done it ?"
" no ," said the girl for the third time .
then said the virgin mary , " thou hast not obeyed me , and besides that thou hast lied , thou art no longer worthy to be in heaven .
" then the girl fell into a deep sleep , and when she awoke she lay on the earth below , and in the midst of a wilderness .
she wanted to cry out , but she could bring forth no sound .
she sprang up and wanted to run away , but whithersoever she turned herself , she was continually held back by thick hedges of thorns through which she could not break .
in the desert , in which she was imprisoned , there stood an old hollow tree , and this had to be her dwelling - place .
into this she crept when night came , and here she slept .
here , too , she found a shelter from storm and rain , but it was a miserable life , and bitterly did she weep when she remembered how happy she had been in heaven , and how the angels had played with her .
roots and wild berries were her only food , and for these she sought as far as she could go .
in the autumn she picked up the fallen nuts and leaves , and carried them into the hole .
the nuts were her food in winter , and when snow and ice came , she crept amongst the leaves like a poor little animal that she might not freeze .
before long her clothes were all torn , and one bit of them after another fell off her .
as soon , however , as the sun shone warm again , she went out and sat in front of the tree , and her long hair covered her on all sides like a mantle .
thus she sat year after year , and felt the pain and misery of the world .
one day , when the trees were once more clothed in fresh green , the king of the country was hunting in the forest , and followed a roe , and as it had fled into the thicket which shut in this bit of the forest , he got off his horse , tore the bushes asunder , and cut himself a path with his sword .
when he had at last forced his way through , he saw a wonderfully beautiful maiden sitting under the tree ; and she sat there and was entirely covered with her golden hair down to her very feet .
he stood still and looked at her full of surprise , then he spoke to her and said , " who art thou ?
why art thou sitting here in the wilderness ?"
but she gave no answer , for she could not open her mouth .
the king continued , " wilt thou go with me to my castle ?"
then she just nodded her head a little .
the king took her in his arms , carried her to his horse , and rode home with her , and when he reached the royal castle he caused her to be dressed in beautiful garments , and gave her all things in abundance .
although she could not speak , she was still so beautiful and charming that he began to love her with all his heart , and it was not long before he married her . after a year or so had passed , the queen brought a son into the world .
thereupon the virgin mary appeared to her in the night when she lay in her bed alone , and said , " if thou wilt tell the truth and confess that thou didst unlock the forbidden door , i will open thy mouth and give thee back thy speech , but if thou perseverest in thy sin , and deniest obstinately , i will take thy new - born child away with me ."
then the queen was permitted to answer , but she remained hard , and said , " no , i did not open the forbidden door ;" and the virgin mary took the new - born child from her arms , and vanished with it .
next morning , when the child was not to be found , it was whispered among the people that the queen was a man - eater , and had killed her own child .
she heard all this and could say nothing to the contrary , but the king would not believe it , for he loved her so much . when a year had gone by the queen again bore a son , and in the night the virgin mary again came to her , and said , " if thou wilt confess that thou openedst the forbidden door , i will give thee thy child back and untie thy tongue ; but if thou continuest in sin and deniest it , i will take away with me this new child also ."
then the queen again said , " no , i did not open the forbidden door ;" and the virgin took the child out of her arms , and away with her to heaven .
next morning , when this child also had disappeared , the people declared quite loudly that the queen had devoured it , and the king ' s councillors demanded that she should be brought to justice .
the king , however , loved her so dearly that he would not believe it , and commanded the councillors under pain of death not to say any more about it . the following year the queen gave birth to a beautiful little daughter , and for the third time the virgin mary appeared to her in the night and said , " follow me ."
she took the queen by the hand and led her to heaven , and showed her there her two eldest children , who smiled at her , and were playing with the ball of the world .
when the queen rejoiced thereat , the virgin mary said , " is thy heart not yet softened ?
if thou wilt own that thou openedst the forbidden door , i will give thee back thy two little sons ."
but for the third time the queen answered , " no , i did not open the forbidden door ."
then the virgin let her sink down to earth once more , and took from her likewise her third child . next morning , when the loss was reported abroad , all the people cried loudly , " the queen is a man - eater !
she must be judged ," and the king was no longer able to restrain his councillors .
thereupon a trial was held , and as she could not answer , and defend herself , she was condemned to be burnt alive .
the wood was got together , and when she was fast bound to the stake , and the fire began to burn round about her , the hard ice of pride melted , her heart was moved by repentance , and she thought , " if i could but confess before my death that i opened the door ."
then her voice came back to her , and she cried out loudly , " yes , mary , i did it ;" and straightway rain fell from the sky and extinguished the flames of fire , and a light broke forth above her , and the virgin mary descended with the two little sons by her side , and the new - born daughter in her arms .
she spoke kindly to her , and said , " he who repents his sin and acknowledges it , is forgiven ."
then she gave her the three children , untied her tongue , and granted her happiness for her whole life .
