there was once a miller who was poor , but he had one beautiful daughter .
it happened one day that he came to speak with the king , and , to give himself consequence , he told him that he had a daughter who could spin gold out of straw .
the king said to the miller , " that is an art that pleases me well ; if thy daughter is as clever as you say , bring her to my castle to - morrow , that i may put her to the proof .
" when the girl was brought to him , he led her into a room that was quite full of straw , and gave her a wheel and spindle , and said , " now set to work , and if by the early morning thou hast not spun this straw to gold thou shalt die ."
and he shut the door himself , and left her there alone .
and so the poor miller ' s daughter was left there sitting , and could not think what to do for her life : she had no notion how to set to work to spin gold from straw , and her distress grew so great that she began to weep .
then all at once the door opened , and in came a little man , who said , " good evening , miller ' s daughter ; why are you crying ?"" oh !"
answered the girl , " i have got to spin gold out of straw , and i don ' t understand the business ."
then the little man said , " what will you give me if i spin it for you ?"
- " my necklace ," said the girl .
the little man took the necklace , seated himself before the wheel , and whirr , whirr , whirr !
three times round and the bobbin was full ; then he took up another , and whirr , whirr , whirr !
three times round , and that was full ; and so he went on till the morning , when all the straw had been spun , and all the bobbins were full of gold . at sunrise came the king , and when he saw the gold he was astonished and very much rejoiced , for he was very avaricious .
he had the miller ' s daughter taken into another room filled with straw , much bigger than the last , and told her that as she valued her life she must spin it all in one night .
the girl did not know what to do , so she began to cry , and then the door opened , and the little man appeared and said , " what will you give me if i spin all this straw into gold ?"
- " the ring from my finger ," answered the girl .
so the little man took the ring , and began again to send the wheel whirring round , and by the next morning all the straw was spun into glistening gold .
the king was rejoiced beyond measure at the sight , but as he could never have enough of gold , he had the miller ' s daughter taken into a still larger room full of straw , and said , " this , too , must be spun in one night , and if you accomplish it you shall be my wife ."
for he thought , " although she is but a miller ' s daughter , i am not likely to find any one richer in the whole world ."
as soon as the girl was left alone , the little man appeared for the third time and said , " what will you give me if i spin the straw for you this time ?"
- " i have nothing left to give ," answered the girl .
" then you must promise me the first child you have after you are queen ," said the little man .
" but who knows whether that will happen ?"
thought the girl ; but as she did not know what else to do in her necessity , she promised the little man what he desired , upon which he began to spin , until all the straw was gold .
and when in the morning the king came and found all done according to his wish , he caused the wedding to be held at once , and the miller ' s pretty daughter became a queen . in a year ' s time she brought a fine child into the world , and thought no more of the little man ; but one day he came suddenly into her room , and said , " now give me what you promised me ."
the queen was terrified greatly , and offered the little man all the riches of the kingdom if he would only leave the child ; but the little man said , " no , i would rather have something living than all the treasures of the world ."
then the queen began to lament and to weep , so that the little man had pity upon her .
" i will give you three days ," said he , " and if at the end of that time you cannot tell my name , you must give up the child to me .
" then the queen spent the whole night in thinking over all the names that she had ever heard , and sent a messenger through the land to ask far and wide for all the names that could be found .
and when the little man came next day , ( beginning with caspar , melchior , balthazar ) she repeated all she knew , and went through the whole list , but after each the little man said , " that is not my name ."
the second day the queen sent to inquire of all the neighbours what the servants were called , and told the little man all the most unusual and singular names , saying , " perhaps you are called roast - ribs , or sheepshanks , or spindleshanks ?"
but he answered nothing but " that is not my name ."
the third day the messenger came back again , and said , " i have not been able to find one single new name ; but as i passed through the woods i came to a high hill , and near it was a little house , and before the house burned a fire , and round the fire danced a comical little man , and he hopped on one leg and cried ," to - day do i bake , to - morrow i brew , the day after that the queen ' s child comes in ; and oh !
i am glad that nobody knewthat the name i am called is rumpelstiltskin !
" you cannot think how pleased the queen was to hear that name , and soon afterwards , when the little man walked in and said , " now , mrs . queen , what is my name ?"
she said at first , " are you called jack ?"
- " no ," answered he .
" are you called harry ?"
she asked again .
" no ," answered he .
and then she said , " then perhaps your name is rumpelstiltskin ?
"" the devil told you that !
the devil told you that !"
cried the little man , and in his anger he stamped with his right foot so hard that it went into the ground above his knee ; then he seized his left foot with both his hands in such a fury that he split in two , and there was an end of him .
