once upon a time there was a farmer who had a daughter who used to take his dinner to him in the fields .
one day he said to her , " so that you may find me i will sprinkle bran along the way .
you follow the bran , and you will come to me .
" by chance the old ogre passed that way , and seeing the bran , said , " this means something ."
so he took the bran and scattered it so that it led to his own house . when the daughter set out to take her father his dinner , she followed the bran until she came to the ogre ' s house .
when the ogre saw the young girl , he said , " you must be my wife .
" then she began to weep .
when the father saw that his daughter did not appear , he went home in the evening , and began to search for her , and not finding her , he asked god to give him a son or a daughter . a year after , he had a son whom they called don firriulieddu .
when the child was three days old it spoke , and said , " have you made me a cloak ?
now give me a little dog and the cloak , for i must look for my sister ."
so he set out and went to seek his sister . after a while he came to a plain where he saw a number of men , and asked , " whose cattle are these ?
" the herdsman replied , " they belong to the ogre , who fears neither god nor the saints , who fears don firriulieddu , who is three days old , and is on the way , and gives his dog bread and says , ' eat , my dog , and do not bark , for we have fine things to do .
'" afterwards he saw a flock of sheep , and asked , " whose are these sheep ?"
and received the same answer as from the herdsman . then he arrived at the ogre ' s house and knocked , and his sister opened the door and saw the child .
" who are you looking for ?"
she said .
" i am looking for you , for i am your brother , and you must return to mamma .
" when the ogre heard that don firriulieddu was there , he went and hid himself upstairs .
don firriulieddu asked his sister , " where is the ogre ?"" upstairs .
" don firriulieddu said to his dog , " go upstairs and bark , and i will follow you .
" the dog went up and barked , and firriulieddu followed him , and killed the ogre .
then he took his sister and a quantity of money , and they went home to their mother , and are all contented .
