there was once a woman who was a witch , and she had two daughters , one ugly and wicked , whom she loved the best , because she was her very own daughter , and one pretty and good , whom she hated because she was her step - daughter . one day the stepdaughter put on a pretty apron , which the other daughter liked so much that she became envious , and said to her mother that she must and should have the apron .
" be content , my child ," said the old woman , " thou shalt have it .
thy step - sister has long deserved death , and tonight , while she is asleep , i shall come and cut off her head .
take care to lie at the farthest side of the bed , and push her to the outside .
" and it would have been all over with the poor girl , if she had not been standing in a corner near and heard it all .
she did not dare to go outside the door the whole day long , and when bed - time came the other one got into bed first , so as to lie on the farthest side ; but when she had gone to sleep , the step - daughter pushed her towards the outside , and took the inside place next the wall .
in the night the old woman came sneaking ; in her right hand she held an axe , and with her left she felt for the one who was lying outside , and then she heaved up the axe with both hands , and hewed the head off her only daughter .
when she had gone away , the other girl got up and went to her sweetheart ' s , who was called roland , and knocked at his door .
when he came to her , she said , " listen , dear roland , we must flee away in all haste ; my step - mother meant to put me to death , but she has killed her only child instead .
when the day breaks , and she sees what she has done , we are lost .
"" but i advise you ," said roland , " to bring away her magic wand with you ; otherwise we cannot escape her when she comes after to overtake us ."
so the maiden fetched the magic wand , and she took up the head of her step - sister and let drop three drops of blood on the ground , - one by the bed , one in the kitchen , and one on the steps .
then she hastened back to her sweetheart . when the old witch got up in the morning , she called out to her daughter , to give her the apron , but no daughter came .
then she cried out , " where art thou ?
"" here , at the steps , sweeping !"
answered one of the drops of wood .
the old woman went out , but she saw nobody at the steps , and cried again , " where art thou ?
"" here in the . kitchen warming myself ," cried the second drop of blood .
so she went into the kitchen and found no one .
then she cried again , " where art thou ?
"" oh , here in bed fast asleep !"
cried the third drop of blood .
then the mother went into the room , and up to the bed , and there lay her only child , whose head she had cut off herself . the witch fell into a great fury , rushed to the window , for from it she could see far and wide , and she caught sight of her step - daughter , hastening away with her dear roland .
" it will be no good to you ," cried she , " if you get ever so far away , you cannot escape me .
" then she put on her boots , which took her an hour ' s walk at every stride , and it was not long before she had overtaken them .
but the maiden , when she saw the old woman striding up , changed , by means of the magic wand , her dear roland into a lake , and herself into a duck swimming upon it .
the witch stood on the bank and threw in crumbs of bread , and took great pains to decoy the duck towards her , but the duck would not be decoyed , and the old woman was obliged to go back in the evening disappointed . then the maiden and her dear roland took again their natural shapes , and travelled on the whole night through until daybreak .
then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flower , standing in the middle of a hedge of thorns , and her dear roland into a fiddle - player .
it was not long before the witch came striding up , and she said to the musician , " dear musician , will you be so kind as to reach that pretty flower for me ?"
- " oh yes ," said he , " i will strike up a tune to it ."
then as she crept quickly up to the hedge to break off the flower , for she knew well who it was , he began to play , and whether she liked it or not , she was obliged to dance , for there was magic in the tune .
the faster he played the higher she had to jump , and the thorns tore her clothes , and scratched and wounded her , and he did not cease playing until she was spent , and lay dead . so now they were saved , and roland said , " i will go to my father and prepare for the wedding ."
- " and i will stay here ," said the maiden , " and wait for you , and so that no one should know me , i will change myself into a red milestone ."
so away went roland , and the maiden in the likeness of a stone waited in the field for her beloved . but when roland went home he fell into the snares of another maiden , who wrought so , that he forgot his first love .
and the poor girl waited a long time , but at last , seeing that he did not come , she was filled with despair , and changed herself into a flower , thinking " perhaps some one in passing will put his foot upon me and crush me .
" but it happened that a shepherd , tending his flock , saw the flower , and as it was so beautiful , he gathered it , took it home with him , and put it in his chest .
from that time everything went wonderfully well in the shepherd ' s house .
when he got up in the morning , all the work was already done ; the room was swept , the tables and benches rubbed , fire kindled on the hearth , and water ready drawn ; and when he came home in the middle of the day , the table was laid , and a good meal spread upon it .
he could not understand how it was done , for he never saw anybody in his house , and it was too little for anybody to hide in .
the good serving pleased him well ; but in the end he became uneasy , and went to a wise woman to take counsel of her .
the wise woman said , " there is magic in it : get up early some morning , and if you hear something moving in the room , be it what it may , throw a white cloth over it , and the charm will be broken ."
the shepherd did as she told him , and the next morning at daybreak he saw the chest open , and the flower come out . then he jumped up quickly and threw a white cloth over it .
so the spell was broken , and a lovely maiden stood before him ; and she told him that she had been the flower , and had until now cared for his household matters .
she told him all that had happened to her , and she pleased him so much that he asked her to marry him , but she answered " no ," because she still remained true to her dear roland , though he had forsaken her ; but she promised not to leave the shepherd , but to go on taking care of his house . now the time came when roland ' s wedding was to be held ; and there was an old custom in that country that all the girls should be present , and should sing in honour of the bride and bridegroom .
the faithful maiden , when she knew this , was so sorrowful that she felt as if her heart would break ; and she would not go , until the others came and fetched her .
and when her turn came to sing she slipped behind , so that she stood alone , and so began to sing . and as soon as her song reached roland ' s ear he sprang up and cried , " i know that voice !
that is the right bride , and no other will i have ."
and everything that he had forgotten , and that had been swept out of his mind , came suddenly home to him in his heart .
and the faithful maiden was married to her dear roland ; her sorrow came to an end and her joy began .
