in times gone by there was a king who had at the back of his castle a beautiful pleasure - garden , in which stood a tree that bore golden apples .
as the apples ripened they were counted , but one morning one was missing .
then the king was angry , and he ordered that watch should be kept about the tree every night . now the king had three sons , and he sent the eldest to spend the whole night in the garden ; so he watched till midnight , and then he could keep off sleep no longer , and in the morning another apple was missing .
the second son had to watch the following night ; but it fared no better , for when twelve o ' clock had struck he went to sleep , and in the morning another apple was missing .
now came the turn of the third son to watch , and he was ready to do so ; but the king had less trust in him , and believed he would acquit himself still worse than his brothers , but in the end he consented to let him try .
so the young man lay down under the tree to watch , and resolved that sleep should not be master . when it struck twelve something came rushing through the air , and he saw in the moonlight a bird flying towards him , whose feathers glittered like gold .
the bird perched upon the tree , and had already pecked off an apple , when the young man let fly an arrow at it .
the bird flew away , but the arrow had struck its plumage , and one of its golden feathers fell to the ground : the young man picked it up , and taking it next morning to the king , told him what had happened in the night .
the king called his council together , and all declared that such a feather was worth more than the whole kingdom .
" since the feather is so valuable ," said the king , " one is not enough for me ; i must and will have the whole bird .
" so the eldest son set off , and relying on his own cleverness he thought he should soon find the golden bird .
when he had gone some distance he saw a fox sitting at the edge of a wood , and he pointed his gun at him .
the fox cried out , " do not shoot me , and i will give you good counsel .
you are on your way to find the golden bird , and this evening you will come to a village , in which two taverns stand facing each other .
one will be brightly lighted up , and there will be plenty of merriment going on inside ; do not mind about that , but go into the other one , although it will look to you very uninviting .
''" how can a silly beast give one any rational advice ?"
thought the king ' s son and let fly at the fox , but missed him , and he stretched out his tail and ran quick into the wood .
then the young man went on his way , and towards evening he came to the village , and there stood the two taverns ; in one singing and dancing was going on , the other looked quite dull and wretched .
" i should be a fool ," said he , " to go into that dismal place , while there is anything so good close by ."
so he went into the merry inn , and there lived in clover , quite forgetting the bird and his father , and all good counsel . as time went on , and the eldest son never came home , the second son set out to seek the golden bird .
he met with the fox , just as the eldest did , and received good advice from him without attending to it .
and when he came to the two taverns , his brother was standing and calling to him at the window of one of them , out of which came sounds of merriment ; so he could not resist , but went in and revelled to his heart ' s content . and then , as time went on , the youngest son wished to go forth , and to try his luck , but his father would not consent .
" it would be useless ," said he ; " he is much less likely to find the bird than his brothers , and if any misfortune were to happen to him he would not know how to help himself ; his wits are none of the best ."
but at last , as there was no peace to be had , he let him go . by the side of the wood sat the fox , begged him to spare his life , and gave him good counsel .
the young man was kind , and said , " be easy , little fox , i will do you no harm .
"" you shall not repent of it ," answered the fox , " and that you may get there all the sooner , get up and sit on my tail ."
and no sooner had he done so than the fox began to run , and off they went over stock and stone , so that the wind whistled in their hair .
when they reached the village the young man got down , and , following the fox ' s advice , went into the mean - looking tavern , without hesitating , and there he passed a quiet night . the next morning , when he went out into the field , the fox , who was sitting there already , said , " i will tell you further what you have to do .
go straight on until you come to a castle , before which a great band of soldiers lie , but do not trouble yourself about them , for they will be all asleep and snoring ; pass through them and forward into the castle , and go through all the rooms , until you come to one where there is a golden bird hanging in a wooden cage .
near at hand will stand empty a golden cage of state , but you must beware of taking the bird out of his ugly cage and putting him into the fine one ; if you do so you will come to harm ."
after he had finished saying this the fox stretched out his tail again , and the king ' s son sat him down upon it ; then away they went over stock and stone , so that the wind whistled through their hair . and when the king ' s son reached the castle he found everything as the fox had said : and he at last entered the room where the golden bird was hanging in a wooden cage , while a golden one was standing by ; the three golden apples too were in the room .
then , thinking it foolish to let the beautiful bird stay in that mean and ugly cage , he opened the door of it , took hold of it , and put it in the golden one .
in the same moment the bird uttered a piercing cry .
the soldiers awaked , rushed in , seized the king ' s son and put him in prison . the next morning he was brought before a judge , and , as he confessed everything , condemned to death .
but the king said he would spare his life on one condition , that he should bring him the golden horse whose paces were swifter than the wind , and that then he should also receive the golden bird as a reward . so the king ' s son set off to find the golden horse , but he sighed , and was very sad , for how should it be accomplished ?
and then he saw his old friend the fox sitting by the roadside .
" now , you see ," said the fox , " ail this has happened , because you would not listen to me .
but be of good courage , i will bring you through , and will tell you how you are to get the golden horse .
you must go straight on until you come to a castle , where the horse stands in his stable ; before the stable - door the grooms will be lying , but they will all be asleep and snoring ; and you can go and quietly lead out the horse .
but one thing you must mind - take care to put upon him the plain saddle of wood and leather , and not the golden one , which will hang close by ; otherwise it will go badly with you .
" then the fox stretched out his tail , and the king ' s son seated himself upon it , and away they went over stock and stone until the wind whistled through their hair .
and everything happened just as the fox had said , and he came to the stall where the golden horse was : and as he was about to put on him the plain saddle , he thought to himself , " such a beautiful animal would be disgraced were i not to put on him the good saddle , which becomes him so well ."
however , no sooner did the horse feel the golden saddle touch him than he began to neigh .
and the grooms all awoke , seized the king ' s son and threw him into prison .
the next morning he was delivered up to justice and condemned to death , but the king promised him his life , and also to bestow upon him the golden horse , if he could convey thither the beautiful princess of the golden castle . with a heavy heart the king ' s son set out , but by great good luck he soon met with the faithful fox .
" i ought now to leave you to your own ill - luck ," said the fox , " but i am sorry for you , and will once more help you in your need .
your way lies straight up to the golden castle : you will arrive there in the evening , and at night , when all is quiet , the beautiful princess goes to the bath .
and as she is entering the bathing - house , go up to her and give her a kiss , then she will follow you , and you can lead her away ; but do not suffer her first to go and take leave of her parents , or it will go ill with you ."
then the fox stretched out his tail ; the king ' s son seated himself upon it , and away they went over stock and stone , so that the wind whistled through their hair . and when he came to the golden castle , all was as the fox had said .
he waited until midnight , when all lay in deep sleep , and then as the beautiful princess went to the bathing - house he went up to her and gave her a kiss , and she willingly promised to go with him , but she begged him earnestly , and with tears , that he would let her first go and take leave of her parents .
at first he denied her prayer , but as she wept so much the more , and fell at his feet , he gave in at last . and no sooner had the princess reached her father ' s bedside than he , and all who were in the castle , waked up , and the young man was seized and thrown into prison .
the next morning the king said to him , " thy life is forfeit , but thou shalt find grace if thou canst level that mountain that lies before my windows , and over which i am not able to see : and if this is done within eight days thou shalt have my daughter for a reward ."
so the king ' s son set to work , and dug and shovelled away without ceasing , but when , on the seventh day , he saw how little he had accomplished , and that all his work was as nothing , be fell into great sadness , and gave up all hope . but on the evening of the seventh day the fox appeared , and said , " you do not deserve that i should help you , but go now and lie down to sleep , and i will do the work for you ."
the next morning when he awoke , and looked out of the window , the mountain had disappeared .
the young man hastened full of joy to the king , and told him that his behest was fulfilled , and , whether the king liked it or not , he had to keep to his word , and let his daughter go .
so they both went away together , and it was not long before the faithful fox came up to them .
" well , you have got the best first ," said he ; " but you must know the golden , horse belongs to the princess of the golden castle ."
- " but how shall i get it ?"
asked the young man .
" i am going to tell you ," answered the fox .
" first , go to the king who sent you to the golden castle , and take to him the beautiful princess .
there will then be very great rejoicing ; he will willingly give you the golden horse , and they will lead him out to you ; then mount him without delay , and stretch out your hand to each of them to take leave , and last of all to the princess , and when you have her by the hand swing her up on the horse behind you , and off you go !
nobody will be able to overtake you , for that horse goes swifter than the wind .
" and so it was all happily done , and the king ' s son carried off the beautiful princess on the golden horse .
the fox did not stay behind , and he said to the young man , " now , i will help you to get the golden bird .
when you draw near the castle where the bird is , let the lady alight , and i will take her under my care ; then you must ride the golden horse into the castle - yard , and there will be great rejoicing to see it , and they will bring out to you the golden bird ; as soon as you have the cage in your hand , you must start off back to us , and then you shall carry the lady away ."
the plan was successfully carried out ; and when the young man returned with the treasure , the fox said , " now , what will you give me for my reward ?"
- " what would you like ?"
asked the young man .
" when we are passing through the wood , i desire that you should slay me , and cut my head and feet off .
"" that were a strange sign of gratitude ," said the king ' s son , " and i could not possibly do such a thing ."
then said the fox , " if you will not do it , i must leave you ; but before i go let me give you some good advice .
beware of two things : buy no gallows - meat , and sit at no brook - side ."
with that the fox ran off into the wood . the young man thought to himself , " that is a wonderful animal , with most singular ideas .
how should any one buy gallows - meat ?
and i am sure i have no particular fancy for sitting by a brook - side ."
so he rode on with the beautiful princess , and their way led them through the village where his two brothers had stayed .
there they heard great outcry and noise , and when he asked what it was all about , they told him that two people were going to be hanged .
and when he drew near he saw that it was his two brothers , who had done all sorts of evil tricks , and had wasted all their goods .
he asked if there were no means of setting them free .
" oh yes !
if you will buy them off ," answered the people ; " but why should you spend your money in redeeming such worthless men ?"
but he persisted in doing so ; and when they were let go they all went on their journey together . after a while they came to the wood where the fox had met them first , and there it seemed so cool and sheltered from the sun ' s burning rays that the two brothers said , " let us rest here for a little by the brook , and eat and drink to refresh ourselves ."
the young man consented , quite forgetting the fox ' s warning , and he seated himself by the brook - side , suspecting no evil .
but the two brothers thrust him backwards into the brook , seized the princess , the horse , and the bird , and went home to their father .
" is not this the golden bird that we bring ?"
said they ; " and we have also the golden horse , and the princess of the golden castle ."
then there was great rejoicing in the royal castle , but the horse did not , feed , the bird did not chirp , and the princess sat still and wept . the youngest brother , however , had not perished .
the brook was , by good fortune , dry , and he fell on soft moss without receiving any hurt , but he could not get up again .
but in his need the faithful fox was not lacking ; he came up running , and reproached him for having forgotten his advice .
" but i cannot forsake you all the same ," said he ; " i will help you back again into daylight ."
so he told the young man to grasp his tail , and hold on to it fast , and so he drew him up again .
" still you are not quite out of all danger ," said the fox ; " your brothers , not being certain of your death , have surrounded the wood with sentinels , who are to put you to death if you let yourself be seen ."
a poor beggar - man was sitting by the path , and the young man changed clothes with him , and went clad in that wise into the king ' s courtyard .
nobody knew him , but the bird began to chirp , and the horse began to feed , and the beautiful princess ceased weeping .
" what does this mean ?"
said the king , astonished .
the princess answered , " i cannot tell , except that i was sad , and now i am joyful ; it is to me as if my rightful bridegroom had returned ."
then she told him all that happened , although the two brothers had threatened to put her to death if she let out anything . the king then ordered every person who was in the castle to be brought before him , and with the rest came the young man like a beggar in his wretched garments ; but the princess knew him , and greeted him well , falling on his neck and kissing him .
the wicked brothers were seized and put to death , and the youngest brother was married to the princess , and succeeded to the inheritance of his father . but what became of the poor fox ?
long afterwards the king ' s son was going through the wood , and the fox met him and said , " now , you have everything that you can wish for , but my misfortunes never come to an end , and it lies in your power to free me from them ."
and once more he prayed the king ' s son earnestly to slay him , and cut off his head and feet .
so , at last , he consented , and no sooner was it done than the fox was changed into a man , and was no other than the brother of the beautiful princess ; and thus he was set free from a spell that had bound him for a long , long time .
and now , indeed , there lacked nothing to their happiness as long as they lived .
