a shepherd ' s dog had a master who took no care of him , but often let him suffer the greatest hunger .
at last he could bear it no longer ; so he took to his heels , and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood .
on the road he met a sparrow that said to him , " why are you so sad , my friend ?"
- " because ," said the dog , " i am very very hungry , and have nothing to eat ."
- " if that be all ," answered the sparrow , " come with me into the next town , and i will soon find you plenty of food ."
so on they went together into the town : and as they passed by a butcher ' s shop , the sparrow said to the dog , " stand there a little while till i peck you down a piece of meat ."
so the sparrow perched upon the shelf : and having first looked carefully about her to see if anyone was watching her , she pecked and scratched at a steak that lay upon the edge of the shelf , till at last down it fell .
then the dog snapped it up , and scrambled away with it into a corner , where he soon ate it all up .
" well ," said the sparrow , " you shall have some more if you will ; so come with me to the next shop , and i will peck you down another steak ."
when the dog had eaten this too , the sparrow said to him , " well , my good friend , have you had enough now ?"
- " i have had plenty of meat ," answered he , " but i should like to have a piece of bread to eat after it ."
- " come with me then ," said the sparrow , " and you shall soon have that too ."
so she took him to a baker ' s shop , and pecked at two rolls that lay in the window , till they fell down : and as the dog still wished for more , she took him to another shop and pecked down some more for him .
when that was eaten , the sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now .
" yes ," said he ; " and now let us take a walk a little way out of the town .
" so they both went out upon the high road ; but as the weather was warm , they had not gone far before the dog said , " i am very much tired , i should like to take a nap ."
- " very well ," answered the sparrow , " do so , and in the meantime i will perch upon that bush ."
so the dog stretched himself out on the road , and fell fast asleep .
whilst he slept , there came by a carter with a cart drawn by three horses , and loaded with two casks of wine .
the sparrow , seeing that the carter did not turn out of the way , but would go on in the track in which the dog lay , so as to drive over him , called out , " stop !
stop !
mr carter , or it shall be the worse for you ."
but the carter , grumbling to himself , " you make it the worse for me , indeed !
what can you do ?"
cracked his whip , and drove his cart over the poor dog , so that the wheels crushed him to death .
" there ," cried the sparrow , " thou cruel villain , thou hast killed my friend the dog .
now mind what i say .
this deed of thine shall cost thee all thou art worth ."
- " do your worst , and welcome ," said the brute , " what harm can you do me ?"
and passed on .
but the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart , and pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it ; and than all the wine ran out , without the carter seeing it .
at last he looked round , and saw that the cart was dripping , and the cask quite empty .
" what an unlucky wretch i am !"
cried he .
" not wretch enough yet !"
said the sparrow , as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses , and pecked at him till he reared up and kicked .
when the carter saw this , he drew out his hatchet and aimed a blow at the sparrow , meaning to kill her ; but she flew away , and the blow fell upon the poor horse ' s head with such force , that he fell down dead .
" unlucky wretch that i am !"
cried he .
" not wretch enough yet !"
said the sparrow .
and as the carter went on with the other two horses , she again crept under the tilt of the cart , and pecked out the bung of the second cask , so that all the wine ran out .
when the carter saw this , he again cried out , " miserable wretch that i am !"
but the sparrow answered , " not wretch enough yet !"
and perched on the head of the second horse , and pecked at him too .
the carter ran up and struck at her again with his hatchet ; but away she flew , and the blow fell upon the second horse and killed him on the spot .
" unlucky wretch that i am !"
said he .
" not wretch enough yet !"
said the sparrow ; and perching upon the third horse , she began to peck him too .
the carter was mad with fury ; and without looking about him , or caring what he was about , struck again at the sparrow ; but killed his third horse as he done the other two .
" alas !
miserable wretch that i am !"
cried he .
" not wretch enough yet !"
answered the sparrow as she flew away ; " now will i plague and punish thee at thy own house .
" the carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him , and to go home overflowing with rage and vexation .
" alas !"
said he to his wife , " what ill luck has befallen me !
my wine is all spilt , and my horses all three dead ."
- " alas !
husband ," replied she , " and a wicked bird has come into the house , and has brought with her all the birds in the world , i am sure , and they have fallen upon our corn in the loft , and are eating it up at such a rate !"
away ran the husband upstairs , and saw thousands of birds sitting upon the floor eating up his corn , with the sparrow in the midst of them .
" unlucky wretch that i am !"
cried the carter ; for he saw that the corn was almost all gone .
" not wretch enough yet !"
said the sparrow ; " thy cruelty shall cost thee they life yet !"
and away she flew . the carter seeing that he had thus lost all that he had , went down into his kitchen ; and was still not sorry for what he had done , but sat himself angrily and sulkily in the chimney corner .
but the sparrow sat on the outside of the window , and cried " carter !
thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life !"
with that he jumped up in a rage , seized his hatchet , and threw it at the sparrow ; but it missed her , and only broke the window .
the sparrow now hopped in , perched upon the window - seat , and cried , " carter !
it shall cost thee thy life !"
then he became mad and blind with rage , and struck the window - seat with such force that he cleft it in two : and as the sparrow flew from place to place , the carter and his wife were so furious , that they broke all their furniture , glasses , chairs , benches , the table , and at last the walls , without touching the bird at all .
in the end , however , they caught her : and the wife said , " shall i kill her at once ?"
- " no ," cried he , " that is letting her off too easily : she shall die a much more cruel death ; i will eat her ."
but the sparrow began to flutter about , and stretch out her neck and cried , " carter !
it shall cost thee thy life yet !"
with that he could wait no longer : so he gave his wife the hatchet , and cried , " wife , strike at the bird and kill her in my hand ."
and the wife struck ; but she missed her aim , and hit her husband on the head so that he fell down dead , and the sparrow flew quietly home to her nest .
