there was once on a time a man who was called frederick and a woman called catherine , who had married each other and lived together as young married folks .
one day frederick said , " i will now go and plough , catherine ; when i come back , there must be some roast meat on the table for hunger , and a fresh draught for thirst ."
- " just go , frederick ," answered kate , " just go , i will have all ready for you ."
therefore when dinner - time drew near she got a sausage out of the chimney , put it in the frying - pan , put some butter to it , and set it on the fire .
the sausage began to fry and to hiss , catherine stood beside it and held the handle of the pan , and had her own thoughts as she was doing it .
then it occurred to her , " while the sausage is getting done thou couldst go into the cellar and draw beer ."
so she set the frying - pan safely on the fire , took a can , and went down into the cellar to draw beer .
the beer ran into the can and kate watched it , and then she thought , " oh , dear !
the dog upstairs is not fastened up , it might get the sausage out of the pan .
well thought of ."
and in a trice she was up the cellar - steps again , but the spitz had the sausage in its mouth already , and trailed it away on the ground .
but catherine , who was not idle , set out after it , and chased it a long way into the field ; the dog , however , was swifter than catherine and did not let the sausage journey easily , but skipped over the furrows with it .
" what ' s gone is gone !"
said kate , and turned round , and as she had run till she was weary , she walked quietly and comfortably , and cooled herself .
during this time the beer was still running out of the cask , for kate had not turned the tap .
and when the can was full and there was no other place for it , it ran into the cellar and did not stop until the whole cask was empty .
as soon as kate was on the steps she saw the mischance .
" good gracious !"
she cried .
" what shall i do now to stop frederick knowing it !"
she thought for a while , and at last she remembered that up in the garret was still standing a sack of the finest wheat flour from the last fair , and she would fetch that down and strew it over the beer .
" yes ," said she , " he who saves a thing when he ought , has it afterwards when he needs it ," and she climbed up to the garret and carried the sack below , and threw it straight down on the can of beer , which she knocked over , and frederick ' s draught swam also in the cellar .
" it is all right ," said kate , " where the one is the other ought to be also ," and she strewed the meal over the whole cellar .
when it was done she was heartily delighted with her work , and said , " how clean and wholesome it does look here !
" at mid - day home came frederick : " now , wife , what have you ready for me ?"
- " ah , freddy ," she answered , " i was frying a sausage for you , but whilst i was drawing the beer to drink with it , the dog took it away out of the pan , and whilst i was running after the dog , all the beer ran out , and whilst i was drying up the beer with the flour , i knocked over the can as well , but be easy , the cellar is quite dry again ."
said frederick , " kate , kate , you should not have done that !
to let the sausage be carried off and the beer run out of the cask , and throw out all our flour into the bargain !"
- " indeed , frederick , i did not know that , you should have told me .
" the man thought , " if my wife is like this , i must look after things more ."
now he had got together a good number of thalers which he changed into gold , and said to catherine , " look , these are counters for playing games ; i will put them in a pot and bury them in the stable under the cow ' s manger , but mind you keep away from them , or it will be the worse for you ."
said she , " oh , no , frederick , i certainly will not go ."
and when frederick was gone some pedlars came into the village who had cheap earthen - bowls and pots , and asked the young woman if there was nothing she wanted to bargain with them for ?
" oh , dear people ," said catherine , " i have no money and can buy nothing , but if you have any use for yellow counters i will buy of you ."
- " yellow counters , why not ?
but just let us see them ."
- " then go into the stable and dig under the cow ' s manger , and you will find the yellow counters .
i am not allowed to go there ."
the rogues went thither , dug and found pure gold .
then they laid hold of it , ran away , and left their pots and bowls behind in the house .
catherine though she must use her new things , and as she had no lack in the kitchen already without these , she knocked the bottom out of every pot , and set them all as ornaments on the paling which went round about the house .
when frederick came and saw the new decorations , he said , " catherine , what have you been about ?"
- " i have bought them , frederick , for the counters which were under the cow ' s manger .
i did not go there myself , the pedlars had to dig them out for themselves ."
- " ah , wife ," said frederick , " what have you done ?
those were not counters , but pure gold , and all our wealth ; you should not have done that ."
- " indeed , frederick ," said she , " i did not know that , you should have forewarned me .
" catherine stood for a while and bethought to herself ; then she said , " listen , frederick , we will soon get the gold back again , we will run after the thieves ."
- " come , then ," said frederick , " we will try it ; but take with you some butter and cheese that we may have something to eat on the way ."
- " yes , frederick , i will take them ."
they set out , and as frederick was the better walker , catherine followed him .
" it is to my advantage ," thought she , " when we turn back i shall be a little way in advance ."
then she came to a hill where there were deep ruts on both sides of the road .
" there one can see ," said catherine , " how they have torn and skinned and galled the poor earth , it will never be whole again as long as it lives ," and in her heart ' s compassion she took her butter and smeared the ruts right and left , that they might not be so hurt by the wheels , and as she was thus bending down in her charity , one of the cheeses rolled out of her pocket down the hill .
said catherine , " i have made my way once up here , i will not go down again ; another may run and fetch it back ."
so she took another cheese and rolled it down .
but the cheeses did not come back , so she let a third run down , thinking .
" perhaps they are waiting for company , and do not like to walk alone ."
as all three stayed away she said , " i do not know what that can mean , but it may perhaps be that the third has not found the way , and has gone wrong , i will just send the fourth to call it ."
but the fourth did no better than the third .
then catherine was angry , and threw down the fifth and sixth as well , and these were her last .
she remained standing for some time watching for their coming , but when they still did not come , she said , " oh , you are good folks to send in search of death , you stay a fine long time away !
do you think i will wait any longer for you ?
i shall go my way , you may run after me ; you have younger legs than i ."
catherine went on and found frederick , who was standing waiting for her because he wanted something to eat .
" now just let us have what you have brought with you ," said he .
she gave him the dry bread .
" where have you the butter and the cheeses ?"
asked the man .
" ah , freddy ," said catherine , " i smeared the cart - ruts with the butter and the cheeses will come soon ; one ran away from me , so i sent the others after to call it ."
said frederick , " you should not have done that , catherine , to smear the butter on the road , and let the cheeses run down the hill !"
- " really , frederick , you should have told me .
" then they ate the dry bread together , and frederick said , " catherine , did you make the house safe when you came away ?"
- " no , frederick , you should have told me to do it before ."
- " then go home again , and make the house safe before we go any farther , and bring with you something else to eat .
i will wait here for you ."
catherine went back and thought , " frederick wants something more to eat , he does not like butter and cheese , so i will take with me a handkerchief full of dried pears and a pitcher of vinegar for him to drink ."
then she bolted the upper half of the door fast , but unhinged the lower door , and took it on her back , believing that when she had placed the door in security the house must be well taken care of .
catherine took her time on the way , and thought , " frederick will rest himself so much the longer ."
when she had once reached him she said , " here is the house - door for you , frederick , and now you can take care of the house yourself ."
- " oh , heavens ," said he , " what a wise wife i have !
she takes the under - door off the hinges that everything may run in , and bolts the upper one .
it is now too late to go back home again , but since you have brought the door here , you shall just carry it farther ."
- " i will carry the door , frederick , but the dried pears and the vinegar - jug will be too heavy for me , i will hang them on the door , it may carry them .
" and now they went into the forest , and sought the rogues , but did not find them .
at length as it grew dark they climbed into a tree and resolved to spend the night there .
scarcely , however , had they sat down at the top of it than the rascals came thither who carry away with them what does not want to go , and find things before they are lost .
they sat down under the very tree in which frederick and catherine were sitting , lighted a fire , and were about to share their booty .
frederick got down on the other side and collected some stones together .
then he climbed up again with them , and wished to throw them at the thieves and kill them .
the stones , however , did not hit them , and the knaves cried , " it will soon be morning , the wind is shaking down the fir - apples .
catherine still had the door on her back , and as it pressed so heavily on her , she thought it was the fault of the dried pears , and said , " frederick , i must throw the pears down ."
- " no , catherine , not now ," he replied , " they might betray us ."
- " oh , but , frederick , i must !
they weigh me down far too much ."
- " do it , then , and be hanged !"
then the dried pears rolled down between the branches , and the rascals below said , " the leaves are falling ."
a short time afterwards , as the door was still heavy , catherine said , " ah , frederick , i must pour out the vinegar ."
- " no , catherine , you must not , it might betray us ."
- " ah , but , frederick , i must , it weighs me down far too much ."
- " then do it and be hanged !"
so she emptied out the vinegar , and it besprinkled the robbers .
they said amongst themselves , " the dew is already falling ."
at length catherine thought , " can it really be the door which weighs me down so ?"
and said , " frederick , i must throw the door down ."
- " no , not now , catherine , it might discover us ."
- " oh , but , frederick , i must .
it weighs me down far too much ."
- " oh , no , catherine , do hold it fast ."
- " ah , frederick , i am letting it fall !"
- " let it go , then , in the devil ' s name ."
then it fell down with a violent clatter , and the rascals below cried , " the devil is coming down the tree !"
and they ran away and left everything behind them .
early next morning , when the two came down they found all their gold again , and carried it home . when they were once more at home , frederick said , " and now , catherine , you , too , must be industrious and work ."
- " yes , frederick , i will soon do that , i will go into the field and cut corn ."
when catherine got into the field , she said to herself , " shall i eat before i cut , or shall i sleep before i cut ?
oh , i will eat first ."
then catherine ate and eating made her sleepy , and she began to cut , and half in a dream cut all her clothes to pieces , her apron , her gown , and her shift .
when catherine awoke again after a long sleep she was standing there half - naked , and said to herself , " is it i , or is it not i ?
alas , it is not i ."
in the meantime night came , and catherine ran into the village , knocked at her husband ' s window , and cried , " frederick ."
- " what is the matter ?"
- " i should very much like to know if catherine is in ?"
- " yes , yes ," replied frederick , " she must be in and asleep ."
said she , "' tis well , then i am certainly at home already ," and ran away . outside catherine found some vagabonds who were going to steal .
then she went to them and said , " i will help you to steal ."
the rascals thought that she knew the situation of the place , and were willing .
catherine went in front of the houses , and cried , " good folks , have you anything ?
we want to steal ."
the thieves thought to themselves , " that ' s a fine way of doing things ," and wished themselves once more rid of catherine .
then they said to her , " outside the village the pastor has some turnips in the field .
go there and pull up some turnips for us ."
catherine went to the ground , and began to pull them up , but was so idle that she did not gather them together .
then a man came by , saw her , and stood still and thought that it was the devil who was thus rooting amongst the turnips .
he ran away into the village to the pastor , and said , " mr . pastor , the devil is in your turnip - ground , rooting up turnips ."
- " ah , heavens ," answered the pastor , " i have a lame foot , i cannot go out and drive him away ."
said the man , " then i will carry you on my back ," and he carried him out on his back .
and when they came to the ground , catherine arose and stood up her full height .
" ah , the devil !"
cried the pastor , and both hurried away , and in his great fright the pastor could run better with his lame foot than the man who had carried him on his back could do with his sound one .
