there were once upon a time two brothers , one rich and the other poor .
the rich one was a goldsmith and evil - hearted .
the poor one supported himself by making brooms , and was good and honourable .
the poor one had two children , who were twin brothers and as like each other as two drops of water .
the two boys went backwards and forwards to the rich house , and often got some of the scraps to eat .
it happened once when the poor man was going into the forest to fetch brush - wood , that he saw a bird which was quite golden and more beautiful than any he had ever chanced to meet with .
he picked up a small stone , threw it at him , and was lucky enough to hit him , but one golden feather only fell down , and the bird flew away .
the man took the feather and carried it to his brother , who looked at it and said , " it is pure gold !"
and gave him a great deal of money for it .
next day the man climbed into a birch - tree , and was about to cut off a couple of branches when the same bird flew out , and when the man searched he found a nest , and an egg lay inside it , which was of gold .
he took the egg home with him , and carried it to his brother , who again said , " it is pure gold ," and gave him what it was worth .
at last the goldsmith said , " i should indeed like to have the bird itself ."
the poor man went into the forest for the third time , and again saw the golden bird sitting on the tree , so he took a stone and brought it down and carried it to his brother , who gave him a great heap of gold for it .
" now i can get on ," thought he , and went contentedly home . the goldsmith was crafty and cunning , and knew very well what kind of a bird it was .
he called his wife and said , " roast me the gold bird , and take care that none of it is lost .
i have a fancy to eat it all myself ."
the bird , however , was no common one , but of so wondrous a kind that whosoever ate its heart and liver found every morning a piece of gold beneath his pillow .
the woman made the bird ready , put it on the spit , and let it roast .
now it happened that while it was at the fire , and the woman was forced to go out of the kitchen on account of some other work , the two children of the poor broom - maker ran in , stood by the spit and turned it round once or twice .
and as at that very moment two little bits of the bird fell down into the dripping - tin , one of the boys said , " we will eat these two little bits ; i am so hungry , and no one will ever miss them ."
then the two ate the pieces , but the woman came into the kitchen and saw that they were eating something and said , " what have ye been eating ?"
- " two little morsels which fell out of the bird ," answered they .
" that must have been the heart and the liver ," said the woman , quite frightened , and in order that her husband might not miss them and be angry , she quickly killed a young cock , took out his heart and liver , and put them beside the golden bird .
when it was ready , she carried it to the goldsmith , who consumed it all alone , and left none of it .
next morning , however , when he felt beneath his pillow , and expected to bring out the piece of gold , no more gold pieces were there than there had always been . the two children did not know what a piece of good - fortune had fallen to their lot .
next morning when they arose , something fell rattling to the ground , and when they picked it up there were two gold pieces !
they took them to their father , who was astonished and said , " how can that have happened ?"
when next morning they again found two , and so on daily , he went to his brother and told him the strange story .
the goldsmith at once knew how it had come to pass , and that the children had eaten the heart and liver of the golden bird , and in order to revenge himself , and because he was envious and hard - hearted , he said to the father , " thy children are in league with the evil one , do not take the gold , and do not suffer them to stay any longer in thy house , for he has them in his power , and may ruin thee likewise ."
the father feared the evil one , and painful as it was to him , he nevertheless led the twins forth into the forest , and with a sad heart left them there . and now the two children ran about the forest , and sought the way home again , but could not find it , and only lost themselves more and more .
at length they met with a huntsman , who asked , " to whom do you children belong ?"
- " we are the poor broom - maker ' s boys ," they replied , and they told him that their father would not keep them any longer in the house because a piece of gold lay every morning under their pillows .
" come ," said the huntsman , " that is nothing so very bad , if at the same time you keep honest , and are not idle ."
as the good man liked the children , and had none of his own , he took them home with him and said , " i will be your father , and bring you up till you are big ."
they learnt huntsmanship from him , and the piece of gold which each of them found when he awoke , was kept for them by him in case they should need it in the future . when they were grown up , their foster - father one day took them into the forest with him , and said , " to - day shall you make your trial shot , so that i may release you from your apprenticeship , and make you huntsmen ."
they went with him to lie in wait and stayed there a long time , but no game appeared .
the huntsman , however , looked above him and saw a covey of wild geese flying in the form of a triangle , and said to one of them , " shoot me down one from each corner ."
he did it , and thus accomplished his trial shot .
soon after another covey came flying by in the form of the figure two , and the huntsman bade the other also bring down one from each corner , and his trial shot was likewise successful .
" now ," said the foster - father , " i pronounce you out of your apprenticeship ; you are skilled huntsmen ."
thereupon the two brothers went forth together into the forest , and took counsel with each other and planned something .
and in the evening when they had sat down to supper , they said to their foster - father , " we will not touch food , or take one mouthful , until you have granted us a request ."
said he , " what , then , is your request ?"
they replied , " we have now finished learning , and we must prove ourselves in the world , so allow us to go away and travel ."
then spake the old man joyfully , " you talk like brave huntsmen , that which you desire has been my wish ; go forth , all will go well with you ."
thereupon they ate and drank joyously together . when the appointed day came , their foster - father presented each of them with a good gun and a dog , and let each of them take as many of his saved - up gold pieces as he chose .
then he accompanied them a part of the way , and when taking leave , he gave them a bright knife , and said , " if ever you separate , stick this knife into a tree at the place where you part , and when one of you goes back , he will will be able to see how his absent brother is faring , for the side of the knife which is turned in the direction by which he went , will rust if he dies , but will remain bright as long as he is alive ."
the two brothers went still farther onwards , and came to a forest which was so large that it was impossible for them to get out of it in one day .
so they passed the night in it , and ate what they had put in their hunting - pouches , but they walked all the second day likewise , and still did not get out .
as they had nothing to eat , one of them said , " we must shoot something for ourselves or we shall suffer from hunger ," and loaded his gun , and looked about him .
and when an old hare came running up towards them , he laid his gun on his shoulder , but the hare cried , " dear huntsman , do but let me live , two little ones to thee i ' ll give ," and sprang instantly into the thicket , and brought two young ones .
but the little creatures played so merrily , and were so pretty , that the huntsmen could not find it in their hearts to kill them .
they therefore kept them with them , and the little hares followed on foot .
soon after this , a fox crept past ; they were just going to shoot it , but the fox cried ," dear hunstman , do but let me live , two little ones i ' ll also give .
" he , too , brought two little foxes , and the huntsmen did not like to kill them either , but gave them to the hares for company , and they followed behind .
it was not long before a wolf strode out of the thicket ; the huntsmen made ready to shoot him , but the wolf cried ," dear huntsman , do but let me live , two little ones i ' ll likewise give .
" the huntsmen put the two wolves beside the other animals , and they followed behind them .
then a bear came who wanted to trot about a little longer , and cried :" dear huntsman , do but let me live , two little ones i , too , will give .
" the two young bears were added to the others , and there were already eight of them .
at length who came ?
a lion came , and tossed his mane .
but the huntsmen did not let themselves be frightened and aimed at him likewise , but the lion also said ," dear huntsman , do but let me live , two little ones i , too , will give .
" and he brought his little ones to them , and now the huntsmen had two lions , two bears , two wolves , two foxes , and two hares , who followed them and served them .
in the meantime their hunger was not appeased by this , and they said to the foxes , " hark ye , cunning fellows , provide us with something to eat .
you are crafty and deep ."
they replied , " not far from here lies a village , from which we have already brought many a fowl ; we will show you the way there ."
so they went into the village , bought themselves something to eat , had some food given to their beasts , and then travelled onwards .
the foxes , however , knew their way very well about the district and where the poultry - yards were , and were able to guide the huntsmen . now they travelled about for a while , but could find no situations where they could remain together , so they said , " there is nothing else for it , we must part ."
they divided the animals , so that each of them had a lion , a bear , a wolf , a fox , and a hare , then they took leave of each other , promised to love each other like brothers till their death , and stuck the knife which their foster - father had given them , into a tree , after which one went east , and the other went west . the younger , however , arrived with his beasts in a town which was all hung with black crape .
he went into an inn , and asked the host if he could accommodate his animals .
the innkeeper gave him a stable , where there was a hole in the wall , and the hare crept out and fetched himself the head of a cabbage , and the fox fetched himself a hen , and when he had devoured that got the cock as well , but the wolf , the bear , and the lion could not get out because they were too big .
then the innkeeper let them be taken to a place where a cow was just then lying on the grass , that they might eat till they were satisfied .
and when the huntsman had taken care of his animals , he asked the innkeeper why the town was thus hung with black crape ?
said the host , " because our king ' s only daughter is to die to - morrow ."
the huntsman inquired if she was " sick unto death ?"
- " no ," answered the host , " she is vigorous and healthy , nevertheless she must die !"
- " how is that ?"
asked the huntsman .
" there is a high hill without the town , whereon dwells a dragon who every year must have a pure virgin , or he lays the whole country waste , and now all the maidens have already been given to him , and there is no longer anyone left but the king ' s daughter , yet there is no mercy for her ; she must be given up to him , and that is to be done to - morrow ."
said the huntsman , " why is the dragon not killed ?"
- " ah ," replied the host , " so many knights have tried it , but it has cost all of them their lives .
the king has promised that he who conquers the dragon shall have his daughter to wife , and shall likewise govern the kingdom after his own death .
" the huntsman said nothing more to this , but next morning took his animals , and with them ascended the dragon ' s hill .
a little church stood at the top of it , and on the altar three full cups were standing , with the inscription , " whosoever empties the cups will become the strongest man on earth , and will be able to wield the sword which is buried before the threshold of the door ."
the huntsman did not drink , but went out and sought for the sword in the ground , but was unable to move it from its place .
then he went in and emptied the cups , and now he was strong enough to take up the sword , and his hand could quite easily wield it .
when the hour came when the maiden was to be delivered over to the dragon , the king , the marshal , and courtiers accompanied her .
from afar she saw the huntsman on the dragon ' s hill , and thought it was the dragon standing there waiting for her , and did not want to go up to him , but at last , because otherwise the whole town would have been destroyed , she was forced to go the miserable journey .
the king and courtiers returned home full of grief ; the king ' s marshal , however , was to stand still , and see all from a distance . when the king ' s daughter got to the top of the hill , it was not the dragon which stood there , but the young huntsman , who comforted her , and said he would save her , led her into the church , and locked her in .
it was not long before the seven - headed dragon came thither with loud roaring .
when he perceived the huntsman , he was astonished and said , " what business hast thou here on the hill ?"
the huntsman answered , " i want to fight with thee ."
said the dragon , " many knights have left their lives here , i shall soon have made an end of thee too ," and he breathed fire out of seven jaws .
the fire was to have lighted the dry grass , and the huntsman was to have been suffocated in the heat and smoke , but the animals came running up and trampled out the fire .
then the dragon rushed upon the huntsman , but he swung his sword until it sang through the air , and struck off three of his heads .
then the dragon grew right furious , and rose up in the air , and spat out flames of fire over the huntsman , and was about to plunge down on him , but the huntsman once more drew out his sword , and again cut off three of his heads .
the monster became faint and sank down , nevertheless it was just able to rush upon the huntsman , but he with his last strength smote its tail off , and as he could fight no longer , called up his animals who tore it in pieces .
when the struggle was ended , the huntsman unlocked the church , and found the king ' s daughter lying on the floor , as she had lost her senses with anguish and terror during the contest .
he carried her out , and when she came to herself once more , and opened her eyes , he showed her the dragon all cut to pieces , and told her that she was now delivered .
she rejoiced and said , " now thou wilt be my dearest husband , for my father has promised me to him who kills the dragon ."
thereupon she took off her necklace of coral , and divided it amongst the animals in order to reward them , and the lion received the golden clasp .
her pocket - handkerchief , however , on which was her name , she gave to the huntsman , who went and cut the tongues out of the dragon ' s seven heads , wrapped them in the handkerchief , and preserved them carefully . that done , as he was so faint and weary with the fire and the battle , he said to the maiden , " we are both faint and weary , we will sleep awhile ."
then she said , " yes ," and they lay down on the ground , and the huntsman said to the lion , " thou shalt keep watch , that no one surprises us in our sleep ," and both fell asleep .
the lion lay down beside them to watch , but he also was so weary with the fight , that he called to the bear and said , " lie down near me , i must sleep a little : if anything comes , waken me ."
then the bear lay down beside him , but he also was tired , and called the wolf and said , " lie down by me , i must sleep a little , but if anything comes , waken me ."
then the wolf lay down by him , but he was tired likewise , and called the fox and said , " lie down by me , i must sleep a little ; if anything comes , waken me ."
then the fox lay down beside him , but he too was weary , and called the hare and said , " lie down near me , i must sleep a little , and if anything should come , waken me ."
then the hare sat down by him , but the poor hare was tired too , and had no one whom he could call there to keep watch , and fell asleep .
and now the king ' s daughter , the huntsman , the lion , the bear , the wolf , the fox , and the hare , were all sleeping a sound sleep .
the marshal , however , who was to look on from a distance , took courage when he did not see the dragon flying away with the maiden , and finding that all the hill had become quiet , ascended it .
there lay the dragon hacked and hewn to pieces on the ground , and not far from it were the king ' s daughter and a huntsman with his animals , and all of them were sunk in a sound sleep .
and as he was wicked and godless he took his sword , cut off the huntsman ' s head , and seized the maiden in his arms , and carried her down the hill .
then she awoke and was terrified , but the marshal said , " thou art in my hands , thou shalt say that it was i who killed the dragon ."
- " i cannot do that ," she replied , " for it was a huntsman with his animals who did it ."
then he drew his sword , and threatened to kill her if she did not obey him , and so compelled her that she promised it .
then he took her to the king , who did not know how to contain himself for joy when he once more looked on his dear child in life , whom he had believed to have been torn to pieces by the monster .
the marshal said to him , " i have killed the dragon , and delivered the maiden and the whole kingdom as well , therefore i demand her as my wife , as was promised ."
the king said to the maiden , " is what he says true ?"
- " ah , yes ," she answered , " it must indeed be true , but i will not consent to have the wedding celebrated until after a year and a day ," for she thought in that time she should hear something of her dear huntsman . the animals , however , were still lying sleeping beside their dead master on the dragon ' s hill , and there came a great humble - bee and lighted on the hare ' s nose , but the hare wiped it off with his paw , and went on sleeping .
the humble - bee came a second time , but the hare again rubbed it off and slept on .
then it came for the third time , and stung his nose so that he awoke .
as soon as the hare was awake , he roused the fox , and the fox , the wolf , and the wolf the bear , and the bear the lion .
and when the lion awoke and saw that the maiden was gone , and his master was dead , he began to roar frightfully and cried , " who has done that ?
bear , why didst thou not waken me ?"
the bear asked the wolf , " why didst thou not waken me ?"
and the wolf the fox , " why didst thou not waken me ?"
and the fox the hare , " why didst thou not waken me ?"
the poor hare alone did not know what answer to make , and the blame rested with him .
then they were just going to fall upon him , but he entreated them and said , " kill me not , i will bring our master to life again .
i know a mountain on which a root grows which , when placed in the mouth of any one , cures him of all illness and every wound .
but the mountain lies two hundred hours journey from here ."
the lion said , " in four - and - twenty hours must thou have run thither and have come back , and have brought the root with thee ."
then the hare sprang away , and in four - and - twenty hours he was back , and brought the root with him .
the lion put the huntsman ' s head on again , and the hare placed the root in his mouth , and immediately everything united together again , and his heart beat , and life came back .
then the huntsman awoke , and was alarmed when he did not see the maiden , and thought , " she must have gone away whilst i was sleeping , in order to get rid of me ."
the lion in his great haste had put his master ' s head on the wrong way round , but the huntsman did not observe it because of his melancholy thoughts about the king ' s daughter .
but at noon , when he was going to eat something , he saw that his head was turned backwards and could not understand it , and asked the animals what had happened to him in his sleep .
then the lion told him that they , too , had all fallen asleep from weariness , and on awaking , had found him dead with his head cut off , that the hare had brought the life - giving root , and that he , in his haste , had laid hold of the head the wrong way , but that he would repair his mistake .
then he tore the huntsman ' s head off again , turned it round , and the hare healed it with the root . the huntsman , however , was sad at heart , and travelled about the world , and made his animals dance before people .
it came to pass that precisely at the end of one year he came back to the same town where he had delivered the king ' s daughter from the dragon , and this time the town was gaily hung with red cloth .
then he said to the host , " what does this mean ?
last year the town was all hung with black crape , what means the red cloth to - day ?"
the host answered , " last year our king ' s daughter was to have been delivered over to the dragon , but the marshal fought with it and killed it , and so to - morrow their wedding is to be solemnized , and that is why the town was then hung with black crape for mourning , and is to - day covered with red cloth for joy ?
" next day when the wedding was to take place , the huntsman said at mid - day to the inn - keeper , " do you believe , sir host , that i while with you here to - day shall eat bread from the king ' s own table ?"
- " nay ," said the host , " i would bet a hundred pieces of gold that that will not come true ."
the huntsman accepted the wager , and set against it a purse with just the same number of gold pieces .
then he called the hare and said , " go , my dear runner , and fetch me some of the bread which the king is eating ."
now the little hare was the lowest of the animals , and could not transfer this order to any the others , but had to get on his legs himself .
" alas !"
thought he , " if i bound through the streets thus alone , the butchers ' dogs will all be after me ."
it happened as he expected , and the dogs came after him and wanted to make holes in his good skin .
but he sprang away , have you have never seen one running ?
and sheltered himself in a sentry - box without the soldier being aware of it .
then the dogs came and wanted to have him out , but the soldier did not understand a jest , and struck them with the butt - end of his gun , till they ran away yelling and howling .
as soon as the hare saw that the way was clear , he ran into the palace and straight to the king ' s daughter , sat down under her chair , and scratched at her foot .
then she said , " wilt thou get away ?"
and thought it was her dog .
the hare scratched her foot for the second time , and she again said , " wilt thou get away ?"
and thought it was her dog .
but the hare did not let itself be turned from its purpose , and scratched her for the third time .
then she peeped down , and knew the hare by its collar .
she took him on her lap , carried him into her chamber , and said , " dear hare , what dost thou want ?"
he answered , " my master , who killed the dragon , is here , and has sent me to ask for a loaf of bread like that which the king eats ."
then she was full of joy and had the baker summoned , and ordered him to bring a loaf such as was eaten by the king .
the little hare said , " but the baker must likewise carry it thither for me , that the butchers ' dogs may do no harm to me ."
the baker carried if for him as far as the door of the inn , and then the hare got on his hind legs , took the loaf in his front paws , and carried it to his master .
then said the huntsman , " behold , sir host , the hundred pieces of gold are mine ."
the host was astonished , but the huntsman went on to say , " yes , sir host , i have the bread , but now i will likewise have some of the king ' s roast meat .
" the host said , " i should indeed like to see that ," but he would make no more wagers .
the huntsman called the fox and said , " my little fox , go and fetch me some roast meat , such as the king eats ."
the red fox knew the bye - ways better , and went by holes and corners without any dog seeing him , seated himself under the chair of the king ' s daughter , and scratched her foot .
then she looked down and recognized the fox by its collar , took him into her chamber with her and said , " dear fox , what dost thou want ?"
he answered , " my master , who killed the dragon , is here , and has sent me .
i am to ask for some roast meat such as the king is eating ."
then she made the cook come , who was obliged to prepare a roast joint , the same as was eaten by the king , and to carry it for the fox as far as the door .
then the fox took the dish , waved away with his tail the flies which had settled on the meat , and then carried it to his master .
" behold , sir host ," said the huntsman , " bread and meat are here but now i will also have proper vegetables with it , such as are eaten by the king ."
then he called the wolf , and said , " dear wolf , go thither and fetch me vegetables such as the king eats ."
then the wolf went straight to the palace , as he feared no one , and when he got to the king ' s daughter ' s chamber , he twitched at the back of her dress , so that she was forced to look round .
she recognized him by his collar , and took him into her chamber with her , and said , " dear wolf , what dost thou want ?"
he answered , " my master , who killed the dragon , is here , i am to ask for some vegetables , such as the king eats ."
then she made the cook come , and he had to make ready a dish of vegetables , such as the king ate , and had to carry it for the wolf as far as the door , and then the wolf took the dish from him , and carried it to his master .
" behold , sir host ," said the huntsman , " now i have bread and meat and vegetables , but i will also have some pastry to eat like that which the king eats ."
he called the bear , and said , " dear bear , thou art fond of licking anything sweet ; go and bring me some confectionery , such as the king eats ."
then the bear trotted to the palace , and every one got out of his way , but when he went to the guard , they presented their muskets , and would not let him go into the royal palace .
but he got up on his hind legs , and gave them a few boxes on the ears , right and left , with his paws , so that the whole watch broke up , and then he went straight to the king ' s daughter , placed himself behind her , and growled a little .
then she looked behind her , knew the bear , and bade him go into her room with her , and said , " dear bear , what dost thou want ?"
he answered , " my master , who killed the dragon , is here , and i am to ask for some confectionery , such as the king eats ."
then she summoned her confectioner , who had to bake confectionery such as the king ate , and carry it to the door for the bear ; then the bear first licked up the comfits which had rolled down , and then he stood upright , took the dish , and carried it to his master .
" behold , sir host ," said the huntsman , " now i have bread , meat , vegetables and confectionery , but i will drink wine also , and such as the king drinks ."
he called his lion to him and said , " dear lion , thou thyself likest to drink till thou art intoxicated , go and fetch me some wine , such as is drunk by the king ."
then the lion strode through the streets , and the people fled from him , and when he came to the watch , they wanted to bar the way against him , but he did but roar once , and they all ran away .
then the lion went to the royal apartment , and knocked at the door with his tail .
then the king ' s daughter came forth , and was almost afraid of the lion , but she knew him by the golden clasp of her necklace , and bade him go with her into her chamber , and said , " dear lion , what wilt thou have ?"
he answered , " my master , who killed the dragon , is here , and i am to ask for some wine such as is drunk by the king ."
then she bade the cup - bearer be called , who was to give the lion some wine like that which was drunk by the king .
the lion said , " i will go with him , and see that i get the right wine ."
then he went down with the cup - bearer , and when they were below , the cup - bearer wanted to draw him some of the common wine that was drunk by the king ' s servants , but the lion said , " stop , i will taste the wine first ," and he drew half a measure , and swallowed it down at one draught .
" no ," said he , " that is not right ."
the cup - bearer looked at him askance , but went on , and was about to give him some out of another barrel which was for the king ' s marshal .
the lion said , " stop , let me taste the wine first ," and drew half a measure and drank it .
" that is better , but still not right ," said he .
then the cup - bearer grew angry and said , " how can a stupid animal like you understand wine ?"
but the lion gave him a blow behind the ears , which made him fall down by no means gently , and when he had got up again , he conducted the lion quite silently into a little cellar apart , where the king ' s wine lay , from which no one ever drank .
the lion first drew half a measure and tried the wine , and then he said , that may possibly be the right sort , and bade the cup - bearer fill six bottles of it .
and now they went upstairs again , but when the lion came out of the cellar into the open air , he reeled here and there , and was rather drunk , and the cup - bearer was forced to carry the wine as far as the door for him , and then the lion took the handle of the basket in his mouth , and took it to his master .
the huntsman said , " behold , sir host , here have i bread , meat , vegetables , confectionery and wine such as the king has , and now i will dine with my animals ," and he sat down and ate and drank , and gave the hare , the fox , the wolf , the bear , and the lion also to eat and to drink , and was joyful , for he saw that the king ' s daughter still loved him .
and when he had finished his dinner , he said , " sir host , now have i eaten and drunk , as the king eats and drinks , and now i will go to the king ' s court and marry the king ' s daughter ."
said the host , " how can that be , when she already has a betrothed husband , and when the wedding is to be solemnized to - day ?"
then the huntsman drew forth the handkerchief which the king ' s daughter had given him on the dragon ' s hill , and in which were folded the monster ' s seven tongues , and said , " that which i hold in my hand shall help me to do it ."
then the innkeeper looked at the handkerchief , and said , " whatever i believe , i do not believe that , and i am willing to stake my house and courtyard on it ."
the huntsman , however , took a bag with a thousand gold pieces , put it on the table , and said , " i stake that on it .
" now the king said to his daughter , at the royal table , " what did all the wild animals want , which have been coming to thee , and going in and out of my palace ?"
she replied , " i may not tell you , but send and have the master of these animals brought , and you will do well ."
the king sent a servant to the inn , and invited the stranger , and the servant came just as the huntsman had laid his wager with the innkeeper .
then said he , " behold , sir host , now the king sends his servant and invites me , but i do not go in this way ."
and he said to the servant , " i request the lord king to send me royal clothing , and a carriage with six horses , and servants to attend me ."
when the king heard the answer , he said to his daughter , " what shall i do ?"
she said , " cause him to be fetched as he desires to be , and you will do well ."
then the king sent royal apparel , a carriage with six horses , and servants to wait on him .
when the huntsman saw them coming , he said , " behold , sir host , now i am fetched as i desired to be ," and he put on the royal garments , took the handkerchief with the dragon ' s tongues with him , and drove off to the king .
when the king saw him coming , he said to his daughter , " how shall i receive him ?"
she answered , " go to meet him and you will do well ."
then the king went to meet him and led him in , and his animals followed .
the king gave him a seat near himself and his daughter , and the marshal , as bridegroom , sat on the other side , but no longer knew the huntsman .
and now at this very moment , the seven heads of the dragon were brought in as a spectacle , and the king said , " the seven heads were cut off the dragon by the marshal , wherefore to - day i give him my daughter to wife ."
the huntsman stood up , opened the seven mouths , and said , " where are the seven tongues of the dragon ?"
then was the marshal terrified , and grew pale and knew not what answer he should make , and at length in his anguish he said , " dragons have no tongues ."
the huntsman said , " liars ought to have none , but the dragon ' s tongues are the tokens of the victor ," and he unfolded the handkerchief , and there lay all seven inside it .
and he put each tongue in the mouth to which it belonged , and it fitted exactly .
then he took the handkerchief on which the name of the princess was embroidered , and showed it to the maiden , and asked to whom she had given it , and she replied , " to him who killed the dragon ."
and then he called his animals , and took the collar off each of them and the golden clasp from the lion , and showed them to the maiden and asked to whom they belonged .
she answered , " the necklace and golden clasp were mine , but i divided them among the animals who helped to conquer the dragon ."
then spake the huntsman , " when i , tired with the fight , was resting and sleeping , the marshal came and cut off my head .
then he carried away the king ' s daughter , and gave out that it was he who had killed the dragon , but that he lied i prove with the tongues , the handkerchief , and the necklace ."
and then he related how his animals had healed him by means of a wonderful root , and how he had travelled about with them for one year , and had at length again come there and had learnt the treachery of the marshal by the inn - keeper ' s story .
then the king asked his daughter , " is it true that this man killed the dragon ?"
and she answered , " yes , it is true .
now can i reveal the wicked deed of the marshal , as it has come to light without my connivance , for he wrung from me a promise to be silent .
for this reason , however , did i make the condition that the marriage should not be solemnized for a year and a day ."
then the king bade twelve councillors be summoned who were to pronounce judgment on the marshal , and they sentenced him to be torn to pieces by four bulls .
the marshal was therefore executed , but the king gave his daughter to the huntsman , and named him his viceroy over the whole kingdom .
the wedding was celebrated with great joy , and the young king caused his father and his foster - father to be brought , and loaded them with treasures .
neither did he forget the inn - keeper , but sent for him and said , " behold , sir host , i have married the king ' s daughter , and your house and yard are mine ."
the host said , " yes , according to justice it is so ."
but the young king said , " it shall be done according to mercy ," and told him that he should keep his house and yard , and gave him the thousand pieces of gold as well . and now the young king and queen were thoroughly happy , and lived in gladness together .
he often went out hunting because it was a delight to him , and the faithful animals had to accompany him .
in the neighborhood , however , there was a forest of which it was reported that it was haunted , and that whosoever did but enter it did not easily get out again .
the young king , however , had a great inclination to hunt in it , and let the old king have no peace until he allowed him to do so .
so he rode forth with a great following , and when he came to the forest , he saw a snow - white hart and said to his people , " wait here until i return , i want to chase that beautiful creature ," and he rode into the forest after it , followed only by his animals .
the attendants halted and waited until evening , but he did not return , so they rode home , and told the young queen that the young king had followed a white hart into the enchanted forest , and had not come back again .
then she was in the greatest concern about him .
he , however , had still continued to ride on and on after the beautiful wild animal , and had never been able to overtake it ; when he thought he was near enough to aim , he instantly saw it bound away into the far distance , and at length it vanished altogether .
and now he perceived that he had penetrated deep into the forest , and blew his horn but he received no answer , for his attendants could not hear it .
and as night , too , was falling , he saw that he could not get home that day , so he dismounted from his horse , lighted himself a fire near a tree , and resolved to spend the night by it .
while he was sitting by the fire , and his animals also were lying down beside him , it seemed to him that he heard a human voice .
he looked round , but could perceived nothing .
soon afterwards , he again heard a groan as if from above , and then he looked up , and saw an old woman sitting in the tree , who wailed unceasingly , " oh , oh , oh , how cold i am !"
said he , " come down , and warm thyself if thou art cold ."
but she said , " no , thy animals will bite me ."
he answered , " they will do thee no harm , old mother , do come down ."
she , however , was a witch , and said , " i will throw down a wand from the tree , and if thou strikest them on the back with it , they will do me no harm ."
then she threw him a small wand , and he struck them with it , and instantly they lay still and were turned into stone .
and when the witch was safe from the animals , she leapt down and touched him also with a wand , and changed him to stone .
thereupon she laughed , and dragged him and the animals into a vault , where many more such stones already lay . as , however , the young king did not come back at all , the queen ' s anguish and care grew constantly greater .
and it so happened that at this very time the other brother who had turned to the east when they separated , came into the kingdom .
he had sought a situation , and had found none , and had then travelled about here and there , and had made his animals dance .
then it came into his mind that he would just go and look at the knife that they had thrust in the trunk of a tree at their parting , that he might learn how his brother was .
when he got there his brother ' s side of the knife was half rusted , and half bright .
then he was alarmed and thought , " a great misfortune must have befallen my brother , but perhaps i can still save him , for half the knife is still bright ."
he and his animals travelled towards the west , and when he entered the gate of the town , the guard came to meet him , and asked if he was to announce him to his consort the young queen , who had for a couple of days been in the greatest sorrow about his staying away , and was afraid he had been killed in the enchanted forest ?
the sentries , indeed , thought no otherwise than that he was the young king himself , for he looked so like him , and had wild animals running behind him .
then he saw that they were speaking of his brother , and thought , " it will be better if i pass myself off for him , and then i can rescue him more easily ."
so he allowed himself to be escorted into the castle by the guard , and was received with the greatest joy .
the young queen indeed thought that he was her husband , and asked him why he had stayed away so long .
he answered , " i had lost myself in a forest , and could not find my way out again any sooner ."
at night he was taken to the royal bed , but he laid a two - edged sword between him and the young queen ; she did not know what that could mean , but did not venture to ask . he remained in the palace a couple of days , and in the meantime inquired into everything which related to the enchanted forest , and at last he said , " i must hunt there once more ."
the king and the young queen wanted to persuade him not to do it , but he stood out against them , and went forth with a larger following .
when he had got into the forest , it fared with him as with his brother ; he saw a white hart and said to his people , " stay here , and wait until i return , i want to chase the lovely wild beast ," and then he rode into the forest and his animals ran after him .
but he could not overtake the hart , and got so deep into the forest that he was forced to pass the night there .
and when he had lighted a fire , he heard some one wailing above him , " oh , oh , oh , how cold i am !"
then he looked up , and the self - same witch was sitting in the tree .
said he , " if thou art cold , come down , little old mother , and warm thyself ."
she answered , " no , thy animals will bite me ."
but he said , " they will not hurt thee ."
then she cried , " i will throw down a wand to thee , and if thou smitest them with it they will do me no harm ."
when the huntsman heard that , he had no confidence in the old woman , and said , " i will not strike my animals .
come down , or i will fetch thee ."
then she cried , " what dost thou want ?
thou shalt not touch me ."
but he replied , " if thou dost not come , i will shoot thee ."
said she , " shoot away , i do not fear thy bullets !"
then he aimed , and fired at her , but the witch was proof against all leaden bullets , and laughed , and yelled and cried , " thou shalt not hit me ."
the huntsman knew what to do , tore three silver buttons off his coat , and loaded his gun with them , for against them her arts were useless , and when he fired she fell down at once with a scream .
then he set his foot on her and said , old witch , if thou dost not instantly confess where my brother is , i will seize thee with both my hands and throw thee into the fire .
she was in a great fright , begged for mercy and said , he and his animals lie in a vault , turned to stone .
then he compelled her to go thither with him , threatened her , and said , old sea - cat , now shalt thou make my brother and all the human beings lying here , alive again , or thou shalt go into the fire !
she took a wand and touched the stones , and then his brother with his animals came to life again , and many others , merchants , artizans , and shepherds , arose , thanked him for their deliverance , and went to their homes .
but when the twin brothers saw each other again , they kissed each other and rejoiced with all their hearts .
then they seized the witch , bound her and laid her on the fire , and when she was burnt the forest opened of its own accord , and was light and clear , and the king ' s palace could be seen at about the distance of a three hours walk .
thereupon the two brothers went home together , and on the way told each other their histories .
and when the youngest said that he was ruler of the whole country in the king ' s stead , the other observed , " that i remarked very well , for when i came to the town , and was taken for thee , all royal honours were paid me ; the young queen looked on me as her husband , and i had to eat at her side , and sleep in thy bed ."
when the other heard that , he became so jealous and angry that he drew his sword , and struck off his brother ' s head .
but when he saw him lying there dead , and saw his red blood flowing , he repented most violently : " my brother delivered me ," cried he , " and i have killed him for it ," and he bewailed him aloud .
then his hare came and offered to go and bring some of the root of life , and bounded away and brought it while yet there was time , and the dead man was brought to life again , and knew nothing about the wound . after this they journeyed onwards , and the youngest said , " thou lookest like me , hast royal apparel on as i have , and the animals follow thee as they do me ; we will go in by opposite gates , and arrive at the same time from the two sides in the aged king ' s presence ."
so they separated , and at the same time came the watchmen from the one door and from the other , and announced that the young king and the animals had returned from the chase .
the king said , " it is not possible , the gates lie quite a mile apart ."
in the meantime , however , the two brothers entered the courtyard of the palace from opposite sides , and both mounted the steps .
then the king said to the daughter , " say which is thy husband .
each of them looks exactly like the other , i cannot tell ."
then she was in great distress , and could not tell ; but at last she remembered the necklace which she had given to the animals , and she sought for and found her little golden clasp on the lion , and she cried in her delight , " he who is followed by this lion is my true husband ."
then the young king laughed and said , " yes , he is the right one ," and they sat down together to table , and ate and drank , and were merry .
at night when the young king went to bed , his wife said , " why hast thou for these last nights always laid a two - edged sword in our bed ?
i thought thou hadst a wish to kill me ."
then he knew how true his brother had been .
