there was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich peasants , and just one poor one , whom they called the little peasant .
he had not even so much as a cow , and still less money to buy one , and yet he and his wife did so wish to have one .
one day he said to her , " hark you , i have a good thought , there is our gossip the carpenter , he shall make us a wooden calf , and paint it brown , so that it look like any other , and in time it will certainly get big and be a cow ."
the woman also liked the idea , and their gossip the carpenter cut and planed the calf , and painted it as it ought to be , and made it with its head hanging down as if it were eating . next morning when the cows were being driven out , the little peasant called the cow - herd and said , " look , i have a little calf there , but it is still small and has still to be carried ."
the cow - herd said , " all right , and took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture , and set it among the grass ."
the little calf always remained standing like one which was eating , and the cow - herd said , " it will soon run alone , just look how it eats already !"
at night when he was going to drive the herd home again , he said to the calf , " if thou canst stand there and eat thy fill , thou canst also go on thy four legs ; i don ' t care to drag thee home again in my arms ."
but the little peasant stood at his door , and waited for his little calf , and when the cow - herd drove the cows through the village , and the calf was missing , he inquired where it was .
the cow - herd answered , " it is still standing out there eating .
it would not stop and come with us ."
but the little peasant said , " oh , but i must have my beast back again ."
then they went back to the meadow together , but some one had stolen the calf , and it was gone .
the cow - herd said , " it must have run away ."
the peasant , however , said , " don ' t tell me that ," and led the cow - herd before the mayor , who for his carelessness condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away . and now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had so long wished , and they were heartily glad , but they had no food for it , and could give it nothing to eat , so it soon had to be killed .
they salted the flesh , and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell the skin there , so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds .
on the way he passed by a mill , and there sat a raven with broken wings , and out of pity he took him and wrapped him in the skin .
as , however , the weather grew so bad and there was a storm of rain and wind , he could go no farther , and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter .
the miller ' s wife was alone in the house , and said to the peasant , " lay thyself on the straw there ," and gave him a slice of bread with cheese on it .
the peasant ate it , and lay down with his skin beside him , and the woman thought , " he is tired and has gone to sleep ."
in the meantime came the parson ; the miller ' s wife received him well , and said , " my husband is out , so we will have a feast ."
the peasant listened , and when he heard about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make shift with a slice of bread with cheese on it .
then the woman served up four different things , roast meat , salad , cakes , and wine . just as they were about to sit down and eat , there was a knocking outside .
the woman said , " oh , heavens !
it is my husband !"
she quickly hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove , the wine under the pillow , the salad on the bed , the cakes under it , and the parson in the cupboard in the entrance .
then she opened the door for her husband , and said , " thank heaven , thou art back again !
there is such a storm , it looks as if the world were coming to an end ."
the miller saw the peasant lying on the straw , and asked , " what is that fellow doing there ?"
- " ah ," said the wife , " the poor knave came in the storm and rain , and begged for shelter , so i gave him a bit of bread and cheese , and showed him where the straw was ."
the man said , " i have no objection , but be quick and get me something to eat ."
the woman said , " but i have nothing but bread and cheese ."
- " i am contented with anything ," replied the husband , " so far as i am concerned , bread and cheese will do ," and looked at the peasant and said , " come and eat some more with me ."
the peasant did not require to be invited twice , but got up and ate .
after this the miller saw the skin in which the raven was , lying on the ground , and asked , " what hast thou there ?"
the peasant answered , " i have a soothsayer inside it ."
- " can he foretell anything to me ?"
said the miller .
" why not ?"
answered the peasant , " but he only says four things , and the fifth he keeps to himself ."
the miller was curious , and said , " let him foretell something for once ."
then the peasant pinched the raven ' s head , so that he croaked and made a noise like krr , krr .
the miller said , " what did he say ?"
the peasant answered , " in the first place , he says that there is some wine hidden under the pillow ."
- " bless me !"
cried the miller , and went there and found the wine .
" now go on ," said he .
the peasant made the raven croak again , and said , " in the second place , he says that there is some roast meat in the tiled stove ."
- " upon my word !"
cried the miller , and went thither , and found the roast meat .
the peasant made the raven prophesy still more , and said , " thirdly , he says that there is some salad on the bed ."
- " that would be a fine thing !"
cried the miller , and went there and found the salad .
at last the peasant pinched the raven once more till he croaked , and said , " fourthly , he says that there are some cakes under the bed ."
- " that would be a fine thing !"
cried the miller , and looked there , and found the cakes . and now the two sat down to the table together , but the miller ' s wife was frightened to death , and went to bed and took all the keys with her .
the miller would have liked much to know the fifth , but the little peasant said , " first , we will quickly eat the four things , for the fifth is something bad ."
so they ate , and after that they bargained how much the miller was to give for the fifth prophesy , until they agreed on three hundred thalers .
then the peasant once more pinched the raven ' s head till he croaked loudly .
the miller asked , " what did he say ?"
the peasant replied , " he says that the devil is hiding outside there in the cupboard in the entrance ."
the miller said , " the devil must go out ," and opened the house - door ; then the woman was forced to give up the keys , and the peasant unlocked the cupboard .
the parson ran out as fast as he could , and the miller said , " it was true ; i saw the black rascal with my own eyes ."
the peasant , however , made off next morning by daybreak with the three hundred thalers . at home the small peasant gradually launched out ; he built a beautiful house , and the peasants said , " the small peasant has certainly been to the place where golden snow falls , and people carry the gold home in shovels ."
then the small peasant was brought before the mayor , and bidden to say from whence his wealth came .
he answered , " i sold my cow ' s skin in the town , for three hundred thalers ."
when the peasants heard that , they too wished to enjoy this great profit , and ran home , killed all their cows , and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in the town to the greatest advantage .
the mayor , however , said , " but my servant must go first ."
when she came to the merchant in the town , he did not give her more than two thalers for a skin , and when the others came , he did not give them so much , and said , " what can i do with all these skins ?
" then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have thus overreached them , wanted to take vengeance on him , and accused him of this treachery before the mayor .
the innocent little peasant was unanimously sentenced to death , and was to be rolled into the water , in a barrel pierced full of holes .
he was led forth , and a priest was brought who was to say a mass for his soul .
the others were all obliged to retire to a distance , and when the peasant looked at the priest , he recognized the man who had been with the miller ' s wife .
he said to him , " i set you free from the cupboard , set me free from the barrel ."
at this same moment up came , with a flock of sheep , the very shepherd who as the peasant knew had long been wishing to be mayor , so he cried with all his might , " no , i will not do it ; if the whole world insists on it , i will not do it !"
the shepherd hearing that , came up to him , and asked , " what art thou about ?
what is it that thou wilt not do ?"
the peasant said , " they want to make me mayor , if i will but put myself in the barrel , but i will not do it ."
the shepherd said , " if nothing more than that is needful in order to be mayor , i would get into the barrel at once ."
the peasant said , " if thou wilt get in , thou wilt be mayor ."
the shepherd was willing , and got in , and the peasant shut the top down on him ; then he took the shepherd ' s flock for himself , and drove it away .
the parson went to the crowd , and declared that the mass had been said .
then they came and rolled the barrel towards the water .
when the barrel began to roll , the shepherd cried , " i am quite willing to be mayor ."
they believed no otherwise than that it was the peasant who was saying this , and answered , " that is what we intend , but first thou shalt look about thee a little down below there ," and they rolled the barrel down into the water . after that the peasants went home , and as they were entering the village , the small peasant also came quietly in , driving a flock of sheep and looking quite contented .
then the peasants were astonished , and said , " peasant , from whence comest thou ?
hast thou come out of the water ?"
- " yes , truly ," replied the peasant , " i sank deep , deep down , until at last i got to the bottom ; i pushed the bottom out of the barrel , and crept out , and there were pretty meadows on which a number of lambs were feeding , and from thence i brought this flock away with me ."
said the peasants , " are there any more there ?"
- " oh , yes ," said he , " more than i could do anything with ."
then the peasants made up their minds that they too would fetch some sheep for themselves , a flock apiece , but the mayor said , " i come first ."
so they went to the water together , and just then there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky , which are called little lambs , and they were reflected in the water , whereupon the peasants cried , " we already see the sheep down below !"
the mayor pressed forward and said , " i will go down first , and look about me , and if things promise well i ' ll call you ."
so he jumped in ; splash !
went the water ; he made a sound as if he were calling them , and the whole crowd plunged in after him as one man .
then the entire village was dead , and the small peasant , as sole heir , became a rich man .
