there was once a wonderful musician , who went quite alone through a forest and thought of all manner of things , and when nothing was left for him to think about , he said to himself , " time is beginning to pass heavily with me here in the forest , i will fetch hither a good companion for myself ."
then he took his fiddle from his back , and played so that it echoed through the trees .
it was not long before a wolf came trotting through the thicket towards him .
" ah , here is a wolf coming !
i have no desire for him !"
said the musician ; but the wolf came nearer and said to him , " ah , dear musician , how beautifully thou dost play !
i should like to learn that , too ."
" it is soon learnt ," the musician replied , " thou hast only to do all that i bid thee ."
" oh , musician ," said the wolf , " i will obey thee as a scholar obeys his master ."
the musician bade him follow , and when they had gone part of the way together , they came to an old oak - tree which was hollow inside , and cleft in the middle .
" look ," said the musician , " if thou wilt learn to fiddle , put thy fore paws into this crevice ."
the wolf obeyed , but the musician quickly picked up a stone and with one blow wedged his two paws so fast that he was forced to stay there like a prisoner .
" stay there until i come back again ," said the musician , and went his way . after a while he again said to himself , " time is beginning to pass heavily with me here in the forest , i will fetch hither another companion ," and took his fiddle and again played in the forest .
it was not long before a fox came creeping through the trees towards him .
" ah , there ' s a fox coming !"
said the musician .
" i have no desire for him ."
the fox came up to him and said , " oh , dear musician , how beautifully thou dost play !
i should like to learn that too ."
" that is soon learnt ," said the musician .
" thou hast only to do everything that i bid thee ."
" oh , musician ," then said the fox , " i will obey thee as a scholar obeys his master ."
" follow me ," said the musician ; and when they had walked a part of the way , they came to a footpath , with high bushes on both sides of it .
there the musician stood still , and from one side bent a young hazel - bush down to the ground , and put his foot on the top of it , then he bent down a young tree from the other side as well , and said , " now , little fox , if thou wilt learn something , give me thy left front paw ."
the fox obeyed , and the musician fastened his paw to the left bough .
" little fox ," said he , " now reach me thy right paw ," and he tied it to the right bough .
then he had examined whether they were firm enough , he let go , and the bushes sprang up again , and jerked up the little fox , so that it hung struggling in the air .
" wait there till i come back again ," said the musician , and went his way . again he said to himself , " time is beginning to pass heavily with me here in the forest , i will fetch hither another companion ," so he took his fiddle , and the sound echoed through the forest .
then a little hare came springing towards him .
" why , a hare is coming ," said the musician , " i do not want him ."
" ah , dear musician ," said the hare , " how beautifully thou dost fiddle ; i , too , should like to learn that ."
" that is soon learnt ," said the musician , " thou hast only to do everything that i bid thee .
"" oh , musician ," replied the little hare , " i will obey thee as a scholar obeys his master ."
they went a part of the way together until they came to an open space in the forest , where stood an aspen - tree .
the musician tied a long string round the little hare ' s neck , the other end of which he fastened to the tree .
" now briskly , little hare , run twenty times round the tree !"
cried the musician , and the little hare obeyed , and when it had run round twenty times , it had twisted the string twenty times round the trunk of the tree , and the little hare was caught , and let it pull and tug as it liked , it only made the string cut into its tender neck .
" wait there till i come back ," said the musician , and went onwards . the wolf , in the meantime , had pushed and pulled and bitten at the stone , and had worked so long that he had set his feet at liberty and had drawn them once more out of the cleft .
full of anger and rage he hurried after the musician and wanted to tear him to pieces .
when the fox saw him running , he began to lament , and cried with all his might , " brother wolf , come to my help , the musician has betrayed me !"
the wolf drew down the little tree , bit the cord in two , and freed the fox , who went with him to take revenge on the musician .
they found the tied - up hare , whom likewise they delivered , and then they all sought the enemy together . the musician had once more played his fiddle as he went on his way , and this time he had been more fortunate .
the sound reached the ears of a poor wood - cutter , who instantly , whether he would or no , gave up his work and came with his hatchet under his arm to listen to the music .
" at last comes the right companion ," said the musician , " for i was seeking a human being , and no wild beast ."
and he began and played so beautifully and delightfully that the poor man stood there as if bewitched , and his heart leaped with gladness .
and as he thus stood , the wolf , the fox , and the hare came up , and he saw well that they had some evil design .
so he raised his glittering axe and placed himself before the musician , as if to say , " whoso wishes to touch him let him beware , for he will have to do with me !"
then the beasts were terrified and ran back into the forest .
the musician , however , played once more to the man out of gratitude , and then went onwards .
