there was once on a time an old king who was ill , and thought to himself , " i am lying on what must be my death - bed ."
then said he , " tell faithful john to come to me ."
faithful john was his favourite servant , and was so called , because he had for his whole life long been so true to him .
when therefore he came beside the bed , the king said to him , " most faithful john , i feel my end approaching , and have no anxiety except about my son .
he is still of tender age , and cannot always know how to guide himself .
if thou dost not promise me to teach him everything that he ought to know , and to be his foster - father , i cannot close my eyes in peace ."
then answered faithful john , " i will not forsake him , and will serve him with fidelity , even if it should cost me my life ."
on this , the old king said , " now i die in comfort and peace ."
then he added , " after my death , thou shalt show him the whole castle : all the chambers , halls , and vaults , and all the treasures which lie therein , but the last chamber in the long gallery , in which is the picture of the princess of the golden dwelling , shalt thou not show .
if he sees that picture , he will fall violently in love with her , and will drop down in a swoon , and go through great danger for her sake , therefore thou must preserve him from that ."
and when faithful john had once more given his promise to the old king about this , the king said no more , but laid his head on his pillow , and died . when the old king had been carried to his grave , faithful john told the young king all that he had promised his father on his deathbed , and said , " this will i assuredly perform , and will be faithful to thee as i have been faithful to him , even if it should cost me my life ."
when the mourning was over , faithful john said to him , " it is now time that thou shouldst see thine inheritance .
i will show thee thy father ' s palace ."
then he took him about everywhere , up and down , and let him see all the riches , and the magnificent apartments , only there was one room which he did not open , that in which hung the dangerous picture .
the picture was , however , so placed that when the door was opened you looked straight on it , and it was so admirably painted that it seemed to breathe and live , and there was nothing more charming or more beautiful in the whole world .
the young king , however plainly remarked that faithful john always walked past this one door , and said , " why dost thou never open this one for me ?"
" there is something within it ," he replied , " which would terrify thee ."
but the king answered , " i have seen all the palace , and i will know what is in this room also ," and he went and tried to break open the door by force .
then faithful john held him back and said , " i promised thy father before his death that thou shouldst not see that which is in this chamber , it might bring the greatest misfortune on thee and on me ."
" ah , no ," replied the young king , " if i do not go in , it will be my certain destruction .
i should have no rest day or night until i had seen it with my own eyes .
i shall not leave the place now until thou hast unlocked the door .
" then faithful john saw that there was no help for it now , and with a heavy heart and many sighs , sought out the key from the great bunch .
when he had opened the door , he went in first , and thought by standing before him he could hide the portrait so that the king should not see it in front of him , but what availed that ?
the king stood on tip - toe and saw it over his shoulder .
and when he saw the portrait of the maiden , which was so magnificent and shone with gold and precious stones , he fell fainting to the ground .
faithful john took him up , carried him to his bed , and sorrowfully thought , " the misfortune has befallen us , lord god , what will be the end of it ?"
then he strengthened him with wine , until he came to himself again .
the first words the king said were , " ah , the beautiful portrait !
whose is it ?"
" that is the princess of the golden dwelling ," answered faithful john .
then the king continued , " my love for her is so great , that if all the leaves on all the trees were tongues , they could not declare it .
i will give my life to win her .
thou art my most faithful john , thou must help me .
" the faithful servant considered within himself for a long time how to set about the matter , for it was difficult even to obtain a sight of the king ' s daughter .
at length he thought of a way , and said to the king , " everything which she has about her is of gold tables , chairs , dishes , glasses , bowls , and household furniture .
among thy treasures are five tons of gold ; let one of the goldsmiths of the kingdom work these up into all manner of vessels and utensils , into all kinds of birds , wild beasts and strange animals , such as may please her , and we will go there with them and try our luck .
" the king ordered all the goldsmiths to be brought to him , and they had to work night and day until at last the most splendid things were prepared .
when everything was stowed on board a ship , faithful john put on the dress of a merchant , and the king was forced to do the same in order to make himself quite unrecognizable .
then they sailed across the sea , and sailed on until they came to the town wherein dwelt the princess of the golden dwelling . faithful john bade the king stay behind on the ship , and wait for him .
" perhaps i shall bring the princess with me ," said he , " therefore see that everything is in order ; have the golden vessels set out and the whole ship decorated ."
then he gathered together in his apron all kinds of gold things , went on shore and walked straight to the royal palace .
when he entered the courtyard of the palace , a beautiful girl was standing there by the well with two golden buckets in her hand , drawing water with them .
and when she was just turning round to carry away the sparkling water she saw the stranger , and asked who he was .
so he answered , " i am a merchant ," and opened his apron , and let her look in .
then she cried , " oh , what beautiful gold things !"
and put her pails down and looked at the golden wares one after the other .
then said the girl , " the princess must see these , she has such great pleasure in golden things , that she will buy all you have ."
she took him by the hand and led him upstairs , for she was the waiting - maid .
when the king ' s daughter saw the wares , she was quite delighted and said , " they are so beautifully worked , that i will buy them all of thee ."
but faithful john said , " i am only the servant of a rich merchant .
the things i have here are not to be compared with those my master has in his ship .
they are the most beautiful and valuable things that have ever been made in gold ."
she wanted to have everything brought to her there , but he said , " there are so many of them that it would take a great many days to do that , and so many rooms would be required to exhibit them , that your house is not big enough ."
then her curiosity and longing were still more excited , until at last she said , " conduct me to the ship , i will go there myself , and behold the treasures of thy master .
" on this faithful john was quite delighted , and led her to the ship , and when the king saw her , he perceived that her beauty was even greater than the picture had represented it to be , and thought no other than that his heart would burst in twain .
then she got into the ship , and the king led her within .
faithful john , however , remained behind with the pilot , and ordered the ship to be pushed off , saying , " set all sail , till it fly like a bird in air ."
within , however , the king showed her the golden vessels , every one of them , also the wild beasts and strange animals .
many hours went by whilst she was seeing everything , and in her delight she did not observe that the ship was sailing away .
after she had looked at the last , she thanked the merchant and wanted to go home , but when she came to the side of the ship , she saw that it was on the deep sea far from land , and hurrying onwards with all sail set .
" ah ," cried she in her alarm , " i am betrayed !
i am carried away and have fallen into the power of a merchant i would die rather !"
the king , however , seized her hand , and said , " i am not a merchant .
i am a king , and of no meaner origin than thou art , and if i have carried thee away with subtlety , that has come to pass because of my exceeding great love for thee .
the first time that i looked on thy portrait , i fell fainting to the ground ."
when the princess of the golden dwelling heard that , she was comforted , and her heart was inclined unto him , so that she willingly consented to be his wife . it happened , however , while they were sailing onwards over the deep sea , that faithful john , who was sitting on the fore part of the vessel , making music , saw three ravens in the air , which came flying towards them .
on this he stopped playing and listened to what they were saying to each other , for that he well understood .
one cried , " oh , there he is carrying home the princess of the golden dwelling ."
" yes ," replied the second , " but he has not got her yet ."
said the third , " but he has got her , she is sitting beside him in the ship ."
then the first began again , and cried , " what good will that do him ?
when they reach land a chestnut horse will leap forward to meet him , and the prince will want to mount it , but if he does that , it will run away with him , and rise up into the air with him , and he will never see his maiden more ."
spake the second , " but is there no escape ?
"" oh , yes , if any one else gets on it swiftly , and takes out the pistol which must be in its holster , and shoots the horse dead with it , the young king is saved .
but who knows that ?
and whosoever does know it , and tells it to him , will be turned to stone from the toe to the knee ."
then said the second , " i know more than that ; even if the horse be killed , the young king will still not keep his bride .
when they go into the castle together , a wrought bridal garment will be lying there in a dish , and looking as if it were woven of gold and silver ; it is , however , nothing but sulphur and pitch , and if he put it on , it will burn him to the very bone and marrow ."
said the third , " is there no escape at all ?
"" oh , yes ," replied the second , " if any one with gloves on seizes the garment and throws it into the fire and burns it , the young king will be saved .
but what avails that ?
whosoever knows it and tells it to him , half his body will become stone from the knee to the heart .
" then said the third , " i know still more ; even if the bridal garment be burnt , the young king will still not have his bride .
after the wedding , when the dancing begins and the young queen is dancing , she will suddenly turn pale and fall down as if dead , and if some one does not lift her up and draw three drops of blood from her right breast and spit them out again , she will die .
but if any one who knows that were to declare it , he would become stone from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot ."
when the ravens had spoken of this together , they flew onwards , and faithful john had well understood everything , but from that time forth he became quiet and sad , for if he concealed what he had heard from his master , the latter would be unfortunate , and if he discovered it to him , he himself must sacrifice his life .
at length , however , he said to himself , " i will save my master , even if it bring destruction on myself .
" when therefore they came to shore , all happened as had been foretold by the ravens , and a magnificent chestnut horse sprang forward .
" good ," said the king , " he shall carry me to my palace ," and was about to mount it when faithful john got before him , jumped quickly on it , drew the pistol out of the holster , and shot the horse .
then the other attendants of the king , who after all were not very fond of faithful john , cried , " how shameful to kill the beautiful animal , that was to have carried the king to his palace !"
but the king said , " hold your peace and leave him alone , he is my most faithful john , who knows what may be the good of that !"
they went into the palace , and in the hall there stood a dish , and therein lay the bridal garment looking no otherwise than as if it were made of gold and silver .
the young king went towards it and was about to take hold of it , but faithful john pushed him away , seized it with gloves on , carried it quickly to the fire and burnt it .
the other attendants again began to murmur , and said , " behold , now he is even burning the king ' s bridal garment !"
but the young king said , " who knows what good he may have done , leave him alone , he is my most faithful john .
" and now the wedding was solemnized : the dance began , and the bride also took part in it ; then faithful john was watchful and looked into her face , and suddenly she turned pale and fell to the ground as if she were dead .
on this he ran hastily to her , lifted her up and bore her into a chamber then he laid her down , and knelt and sucked the three drops of blood from her right breast , and spat them out .
immediately she breathed again and recovered herself , but the young king had seen this , and being ignorant why faithful john had done it , was angry and cried , " throw him into a dungeon ."
next morning faithful john was condemned , and led to the gallows , and when he stood on high , and was about to be executed , he said , " every one who has to die is permitted before his end to make one last speech ; may i too claim the right ?"
" yes ," answered the king , " it shall be granted unto thee ."
then said faithful john , " i am unjustly condemned , and have always been true to thee ," and related how he had hearkened to the conversation of the ravens when on the sea , and how he had been obliged to do all these things in order to save his master .
then cried the king , " oh , my most faithful john .
pardon , pardon bring him down ."
but as faithful john spoke the last word he had fallen down lifeless and become a stone . thereupon the king and the queen suffered great anguish , and the king said , " ah , how ill i have requited great fidelity !"
and ordered the stone figure to be taken up and placed in his bedroom beside his bed .
and as often as he looked on it he wept and said , " ah , if i could bring thee to life again , my most faithful john ."
some time passed and the queen bore twins , two sons who grew fast and were her delight .
once when the queen was at church and the two children were sitting playing beside their father , the latter full of grief again looked at the stone figure , sighed and said , " ah , if i could but bring thee to life again , my most faithful john ."
then the stone began to speak and said , " thou canst bring me to life again if thou wilt use for that purpose what is dearest to thee ."
then cried the king , " i will give everything i have in the world for thee ."
the stone continued , " if thou wilt will cut off the heads of thy two children with thine own hand , and sprinkle me with their blood , i shall be restored to life .
" the king was terrified when he heard that he himself must kill his dearest children , but he thought of faithful john ' s great fidelity , and how he had died for him , drew his sword , and with his own hand cut off the children ' s heads .
and when he had smeared the stone with their blood , life returned to it , and faithful john stood once more safe and healthy before him .
he said to the king , " thy truth shall not go unrewarded ," and took the heads of the children , put them on again , and rubbed the wounds with their blood , on which they became whole again immediately , and jumped about , and went on playing as if nothing had happened .
then the king was full of joy , and when he saw the queen coming he hid faithful john and the two children in a great cupboard .
when she entered , he said to her , " hast thou been praying in the church ?"
" yes ," answered she , " but i have constantly been thinking of faithful john and what misfortune has befallen him through us ."
then said he , " dear wife , we can give him his life again , but it will cost us our two little sons , whom we must sacrifice ."
the queen turned pale , and her heart was full of terror , but she said , " we owe it to him , for his great fidelity ."
then the king was rejoiced that she thought as he had thought , and went and opened the cupboard , and brought forth faithful john and the children , and said , " god be praised , he is delivered , and we have our little sons again also ," and told her how everything had occurred .
then they dwelt together in much happiness until their death .
