there was once a husband and a wife who had two children , a son and a daughter .
the wife died , and the husband married a woman who had a daughter blind of one eye .
the husband was a farmer , and went to work in a field .
the stepmother hated her husband ' s children , and to get rid of them she baked some bread , and sent it by them to her husband , but directed them to the wrong field , so that they might get lost .
when the children reached a mountain they began to call their father , but no one answered .
now the girl was enchanted ; and when they came to a spring and the brother wanted to drink , she said to him : '' do not drink of this fountain , or you will become an ass ."
afterwards they found another spring , and the brother wanted to drink ; but his sister said to him : " do not drink of it , or you will become a calf ."
however , the boy would drink , and became a calf with golden horns .
they continued their journey , and came to the seashore , where there was a handsome villa belonging to the prince .
when the prince saw the young girl , and beheld how beautiful she was , he married her , and afterwards asked her what there was about the little calf , and she replied : " i am fond of him because i have brought him up .
" let us now return to her father , who , from the great grief he had on account of his children ' s disappearance , had gone out to divert himself , and wandered away , gathering fennel .
he arrived at last at the villa , where was his daughter who had married the king .
his daughter looked out of the window and said to him : " come up , friend ."
his daughter had recognized him , and asked : " friend , do you not know me 1 " " no , i do not recognize you ."
then she said : i am your daughter , whom you believed lost ."
she threw herself at his feet , and said : " pardon me , dear father ; i came by chance to this villa , and the king ' s son was here and married me ."
the father was greatly consoled at finding his daughter so well married . "
now , my father ," said she , " empty this sack of fennel , for i will fill it with gold for you ."
and then she begged him to bring his wife , and the daughter blind of one eye .
the father returned home with his bag full of money , and his wife asked in terror : " who gave you this money ? "
he answered : " o wife !
do you know that i have found my daughter , and she is the king ' s wife , and filled this bag with money ? "
she , instead of being happy , was angry at hearing that her stepdaughter was still alive ; however , she said to her husband : " i will go and take my daughter ."
so they went , the husband , the wife , and the blind daughter , and came to the husband ' s daughter , who received her stepmother very kindly .
but the latter , seeing that the king was away , and that her stepdaughter was alone , seized her and threw her from a window into the sea ; and what did she do then 1 she took her blind daughter and dressed her in the other ' s clothes , and said to her : " when the king comes and finds you here weeping , say to him : ' the little calf has blinded me with his horn , and i have only one eye ! "'
then the stepmother returned to her own house .
the king came and found her daughter in bed weeping , and said to her : " why are you weeping ? "
" the little calf struck me with his horn and put out one of my eyes ."
the king cried at once : " go call the butcher to kill the calf ? "
when the calf heard that he was to be killed , he went out on the balcony and called to his sister in the sea : —" oh !
sister , for me the water is heated , and the knives are sharpened .'
the sister replied from the sea : — " oh !
brother , i cannot help you , i am in the dog - fish ' s mouth ."
when the king heard the calf utter these words , he looked out of the window , and when he saw his wife in the sea , he summoned two sailors , and had them take her out and bring her up and restore her .
then he took the blind girl and killed her and cut her in pieces and salted her like tunny - fish , and sent her to her mother .
when her husband found it out he left her and went to live with his daughter .
