there was once on a time a king who had three sons , of whom two were clever and wise , but the third did not speak much , and was simple , and was called the simpleton .
when the king had become old and weak , and was thinking of his end , he did not know which of his sons should inherit the kingdom after him .
then he said to them : " go forth , and he who brings me the most beautiful carpet shall be king after my death ."
and that there should be no dispute amongst them , he took them outside his castle , blew three feathers in the air , and said : " you shall go as they fly ."
one feather flew to the east , the other to the west , but the third flew straight up and did not fly far , but soon fell to the ground .
and now one brother went to the right , and the other to the left , and they mocked simpleton , who was forced to stay where the third feather had fallen . he sat down and was sad , then all at once he saw that there was a trap - door close by the feather .
he raised it up , found some steps , and went down them , and then he came to another door , knocked at it , and heard somebody inside calling :" little green maiden small , hopping , hopping hither and thither ; hop to the door , and quickly see who is there ."
the door opened , and he saw a great , fat toad sitting , and round about her a crowd of little toads .
the fat toad asked what he wanted ?
he answered : " i should like to have the prettiest and finest carpet in the world ."
then she called a young one and said :" little green maiden small , hopping , hopping hither and thither , hop quickly and bring methe great box here ."
the young toad brought the box , and the fat toad opened it , and gave simpleton a carpet out of it , so beautiful and so fine , that on the earth above , none could have been woven like it .
then he thanked her , and ascended again . the two others had , however , looked on their youngest brother as so stupid that they believed he would find and bring nothing at all .
" why should we give ourselves a great deal of trouble to search ?"
said they , and got some coarse handkerchiefs from the first shepherds ' wives whom they met , and carried them home to the king .
at the same time simpleton also came back , and brought his beautiful carpet , and when the king saw it he was astonished , and said : " if justice be done , the kingdom belongs to the youngest ."
but the two others let their father have no peace , and said that it was impossible that simpleton , who in everything lacked understanding , should be king , and entreated him to make a new agreement with them .
then the father said : " he who brings me the most beautiful ring shall inherit the kingdom ," and led the three brothers out , and blew into the air three feathers , which they were to follow .
those of the two eldest again went east and west , and simpleton ' s feather flew straight up , and fell down near the door into the earth .
then he went down again to the fat toad , and told her that he wanted the most beautiful ring .
she at once ordered her great box to be brought , and gave him a ring out of it , which sparkled with jewels , and was so beautiful that no goldsmith on earth would have been able to make it .
the two eldest laughed at simpleton for going to seek a golden ring .
they gave themselves no trouble , but knocked the nails out of an old carriage - ring , and took it to the king ; but when simpleton produced his golden ring , his father again said , " the kingdom belongs to him ."
the two eldest did not cease from tormenting the king until he made a third condition , and declared that the one who brought the most beautiful woman home , should have the kingdom .
he again blew the three feathers into the air , and they flew as before . then simpleton without more ado went down to the fat toad , and said : " i am to take home the most beautiful woman !"
- " oh ," answered the toad , " the most beautiful woman !
she is not at hand at the moment , but still thou shalt have her ."
she gave him a yellow turnip which had been hollowed out , to which six mice were harnessed .
then simpleton said quite mournfully : " what am i to do with that ?"
the toad answered : " just put one of my little toads into it ."
then he seized one at random out of the circle , and put her into the yellow coach , but hardly was she seated inside it than she turned into a wonderfully beautiful maiden , and the turnip into a coach , and the six mice into horses .
so he kissed her , and drove off quickly with the horses , and took her to the king .
his brothers came afterwards ; they had given themselves no trouble at all to seek beautiful girls , but had brought with them the first peasant women they chanced to meet .
when the king saw them he said : " after my death the kingdom belongs to my youngest son ."
but the two eldest deafened the king ' s ears afresh with their clamour , " we cannot consent to simpleton ' s being king ," and demanded that the one whose wife could leap through a ring which hung in the centre of the hall should have the preference .
they thought : " the peasant women can do that easily ; they are strong enough , but the delicate maiden will jump herself to death ."
the aged king agreed likewise to this .
then the two peasant women jumped , and jumped through the ring , but were so stout that they fell , and their coarse arms and legs broke in two .
and then the pretty maiden whom simpleton had brought with him , sprang , and sprang through as lightly as a deer , and all opposition had to cease .
so he received the crown , and has ruled wisely for a length of time .
