there was a man who had three sons , the youngest of whom was called the simpleton , and was despised , laughed at , and neglected , on every occasion .
it happened one day that the eldest son wished to go into the forest to cut wood , and before he went his mother gave him a delicious pancake and a flask of wine , that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst .
when he came into the forest a little old grey man met him , who wished him good day , and said , " give me a bit of cake out of your pocket , and let me have a drink of your wine ; i am so hungry and thirsty ."
but the prudent youth answered , " give you my cake and my wine ?
i haven ' t got any ; be off with you ."
and leaving the little man standing there , he went off .
then he began to fell a tree , but he had not been at it long before he made a wrong stroke , and the hatchet hit him in the arm , so that he was obliged to go home and get it bound up .
that was what came of the little grey man . afterwards the second son went into the wood , and the mother gave to him , as to the eldest , a pancake and a flask of wine .
the little old grey man met him also , and begged for a little bit of cake and a drink of wine .
but the second son spoke out plainly , saying , " what i give you i lose myself , so be off with you ."
and leaving the little man standing there , he went off .
the punishment followed ; as he was chopping away at the tree , he hit himself in the leg so severely that he had to be carried home . then said the simpleton , " father , let me go for once into the forest to cut wood ; and the father answered , " your brothers have hurt themselves by so doing ; give it up , you understand nothing about it ."
but the simpleton went on begging so long , that the father said at last , " well , be off with you ; you will only learn by experience ."
the mother gave him a cake ( it was only made with water , and baked in the ashes ), and with it a flask of sour beer .
when he came into the forest the little old grey man met him , and greeted him , saying , " give me a bit of your cake , and a drink from your flask ; i am so hungry and thirsty ."
and the simpleton answered , " i have only a flour and water cake and sour beer ; but if that is good enough for you , let us sit down together and eat ."
then they sat down , and as the simpleton took out his flour and water cake it became a rich pancake , and his sour beer became good wine ; then they ate and drank , and afterwards the little man said , " as you have such a kind heart , and share what you have so willingly , i will bestow good luck upon you .
yonder stands an old tree ; cut it down , and at its roots you will find some thing ," and thereupon the little man took his departure . the simpleton went there , and hewed away at the tree , and when it fell he saw , sitting among the roots , a goose with feathers of pure gold .
he lifted it out and took it with him to an inn where he intended to stay the night .
the landlord had three daughters who , when they saw the goose , were curious to know what wonderful kind of bird it was , and ended by longing for one of its golden feathers .
the eldest thought , " i will wait for a good opportunity , and then i will pull out one of its feathers for myself ;" and so , when the simpleton was gone out , she seized the goose by its wing - but there her finger and hand had to stay , held fast .
soon after came the second sister with the same idea of plucking out one of the golden feathers for herself ; but scarcely had she touched her sister , than she also was obliged to stay , held fast .
lastly came the third with the same intentions ; but the others screamed out , " stay away !
for heaven ' s sake stay away !"
but she did not see why she should stay away , and thought , " if they do so , why should not i ?"
and went towards them .
but when she reached her sisters there she stopped , hanging on with them .
and so they had to stay , all night . the next morning the simpleton took the goose under his arm and went away , unmindful of the three girls that hung on to it .
the three had always to run after him , left and right , wherever his legs carried him .
in the midst of the fields they met the parson , who , when he saw the procession , said , " shame on you , girls , running after a young fellow through the fields like this ," and forthwith he seized hold of the youngest by the hand to drag her away , but hardly had he touched her when he too was obliged to run after them himself .
not long after the sexton came that way , and seeing the respected parson following at the heels of the three girls , he called out , " ho , your reverence , whither away so quickly ?
you forget that we have another christening to - day ," and he seized hold of him by his gown ; but no sooner had he touched him than he was obliged to follow on too .
as the five tramped on , one after another , two peasants with their hoes came up from the fields , and the parson cried out to them , and begged them to come and set him and the sexton free , but no sooner had they touched the sexton than they had to follow on too ; and now there were seven following the simpleton and the goose . by and by they came to a town where a king reigned , who had an only daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh ; therefore the king had given out that whoever should make her laugh should have her in marriage .
the simpleton , when he heard this , went with his goose and his hangers - on into the presence of the king ' s daughter , and as soon as she saw the seven people following always one after the other , she burst out laughing , and seemed as if she could never stop . and so the simpleton earned a right to her as his bride ; but the king did not like him for a son - in - law and made all kinds of objections , and said he must first bring a man who could drink up a whole cellar of wine .
the simpleton thought that the little grey man would be able to help him , and went out into the forest , and there , on the very spot where he felled the tree , he saw a man sitting with a very sad countenance .
the simpleton asked him what was the matter , and he answered , " i have a great thirst , which i cannot quench : cold water does not agree with me ; i have indeed drunk up a whole cask of wine , but what good is a drop like that ?"
then said the simpleton , " i can help you ; only come with me , and you shall have enough ."
he took him straight to the king ' s cellar , and the man sat himself down before the big vats , and drank , and drank , and before a day was over he had drunk up the whole cellar - full . the simpleton again asked for his bride , but the king was annoyed that a wretched fellow , called the simpleton by everybody , should carry off his daughter , and so he made new conditions .
he was to produce a man who could eat up a mountain of bread .
the simpleton did not hesitate long , but ran quickly off to the forest , and there in the same place sat a man who had fastened a strap round his body , making a very piteous face , and saying , " i have eaten a whole bakehouse full of rolls , but what is the use of that when one is so hungry as i am ?
my stomach feels quite empty , and i am obliged to strap myself together , that i may not die of hunger ."
the simpleton was quite glad of this , and said , " get up quickly , and come along with me , and you shall have enough to eat ."
he led him straight to the king ' s courtyard , where all the meal in the kingdom had been collected and baked into a mountain of bread .
the man out of the forest settled himself down before it and hastened to eat , and in one day the whole mountain had disappeared .
then the simpleton asked for his bride the third time .
the king , however , found one more excuse , and said he must have a ship that should be able to sail on land or on water .
" so soon ," said he , " as you come sailing along with it , you shall have my daughter for your wife ."
the simpleton went straight to the forest , and there sat the little old grey man with whom he had shared his cake , and he said , " i have eaten for you , and i have drunk for you , i will also give you the ship ; and all because you were kind to me at the first ."
then he gave him the ship that could sail on land and on water , and when the king saw it he knew he could no longer withhold his daughter . the marriage took place immediately , and at the death of the king the simpleton possessed the kingdom , and lived long and happily with his wife .
