there was once a king ' s son who was betrothed to a maiden whom he loved very much .
and when he was sitting beside her and very happy , news came that his father lay sick unto death , and desired to see him once again before his end .
then he said to his beloved , " i must now go and leave thee , i give thee a ring as a remembrance of me .
when i am king , i will return and fetch thee ."
so he rode away , and when he reached his father , the latter was dangerously ill , and near his death .
he said to him , " dear son , i wished to see thee once again before my end , promise me to marry as i wish ," and he named a certain king ' s daughter who was to be his wife .
the son was in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing , and said , " yes , dear father , your will shall be done ," and thereupon the king shut his eyes , and died . when therefore the son had been proclaimed king , and the time of mourning was over , he was forced to keep the promise which he had given his father , and caused the king ' s daughter to be asked in marriage , and she was promised to him .
his first betrothed heard of this , and fretted so much about his faithlessness that she nearly died .
then her father said to her , " dearest child , why art thou so sad ?
thou shalt have whatsoever thou wilt ."
she thought for a moment and said , " dear father , i wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in face , figure , and size ."
the father said , " if it be possible , thy desire shall be fulfilled ," and he caused a search to be made in his whole kingdom , until eleven young maidens were found who exactly resembled his daughter in face , figure , and size . when they came to the king ' s daughter , she had twelve suits of huntsmen ' s clothes made , all alike , and the eleven maidens had to put on the huntsmen ' s clothes , and she herself put on the twelfth suit .
thereupon she took leave of her father , and rode away with them , and rode to the court of her former betrothed , whom she loved so dearly .
then she inquired if he required any huntsmen , and if he would take the whole of them into his service .
the king looked at her and did not know her , but as they were such handsome fellows , he said , " yes ," and that he would willingly take them , and now they were the king ' s twelve huntsmen . the king , however , had a lion which was a wondrous animal , for he knew all concealed and secret things .
it came to pass that one evening he said to the king , " thou thinkest thou hast twelve huntsmen ?"
- " yes ," said the king , " they are twelve huntsmen ."
the lion continued , " thou art mistaken , they are twelve girls ."
the king said , " that cannot be true !
how wilt thou prove that to me ?"
- " oh , just let some peas be strewn in thy ante - chamber ," answered the lion , " and then thou wilt soon see it .
men have a firm step , and when they walk over the peas none of them stir , but girls trip and skip , and drag their feet , and the peas roll about ."
the king was well pleased with the counsel , and caused the peas to be strewn . there was , however , a servant of the king ' s who favored the huntsmen , and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he went to them and repeated everything , and said , " the lion wants to make the king believe that you are girls ."
then the king ' s daughter thanked him , and said to her maidens , " put on some strength , and step firmly on the peas ."
so next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmen called before him , and they came into the ante - chamber where the peas were lying , they stepped so firmly on them , and had such a strong , sure walk , that not one of the peas either rolled or stirred .
then they went away again , and the king said to the lion , " thou hast lied to me , they walk just like men ."
the lion said , " they have got to know that they were going to be put to the test , and have assumed some strength .
just let twelve spinning - wheels be brought into the ante - chamber some day , and they will go to them and be pleased with them , and that is what no man would do ."
the king liked the advice , and had the spinning - wheels placed in the ante - chamber . but the servant , who was well disposed to the huntsmen , went to them , and disclosed the project .
then when they were alone the king ' s daughter said to her eleven girls , " put some constraint on yourselves , and do not look round at the spinning - wheels ."
and next morning when the king had his twelve huntsmen summoned , they went through the ante - chamber , and never once looked at the spinning wheels .
then the king again said to the lion , " thou hast deceived me , they are men , for they have not looked at the spinning - wheels ."
the lion replied , " they have learnt that they were going to be put to the test , and have restrained themselves ."
the king , however , would no longer believe the lion . the twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase , and his liking for them continually increased .
now it came to pass that once when they were out hunting , news came that the king ' s betrothed was approaching .
when the true bride heard that , it hurt her so much that her heart was almost broken , and she fell fainting to the ground .
the king thought something had happened to his dear huntsman , ran up to him , wanted to help him , and drew his glove off .
then he saw the ring which he had given to his first bride , and when he looked in her face he recognized her .
then his heart was so touched that he kissed her , and when she opened her eyes he said , " thou art mine , and i am thine , and no one in the world can alter that ."
he sent a messenger to the other bride , and entreated her to return to her own kingdom , for he had a wife already , and a man who had just found an old dish did not require a new one .
thereupon the wedding was celebrated , and the lion was again taken into favour , because , after all , he had told the truth .
