hans wished to put his son to learn a trade , so he went into the church and prayed to our lord god to know which would be most advantageous for him .
then the clerk got behind the altar , and said , " thieving , thieving ."
on this hans goes back to his son , and tells him he is to learn thieving , and that the lord god had said so .
so he goes with his son to seek a man who is acquainted with thieving .
they walk a long time and come into a great forest , where stands a little house with an old woman in it .
hans says , " do you know of a man who is acquainted with thieving ?"
- " you can learn that here quite well ," says the woman , " my son is a master of it ."
so he speaks with the son , and asks if he knows thieving really well ?
the master - thief says , " i will teach him well .
come back when a year is over , and then if you recognize your son , i will take no payment at all for teaching him ; but if you don ' t know him , you must give me two hundred thalers .
" the father goes home again , and the son learns witchcraft and thieving , thoroughly .
when the year is out , the father is full of anxiety to know how he is to contrive to recognize his son .
as he is thus going about in his trouble , he meets a little dwarf , who says , " man , what ails you , that you are always in such trouble ?
"" oh ," says hans , " a year ago i placed my son with a master - thief who told me i was to come back when the year was out , and that if i then did not know my son when i saw him , i was to pay two hundred thalers ; but if i did know him i was to pay nothing , and now i am afraid of not knowing him and can ' t tell where i am to get the money ."
then the dwarf tells him to take a small basket of bread with him , and to stand beneath the chimney .
" there on the cross - beam is a basket , out of which a little bird is peeping , and that is your son .
" hans goes thither , and throws a little basket full of black bread in front of the basket with the bird in it , and the little bird comes out , and looks up .
" hollo , my son , art thou here ?"
says the father , and the son is delighted to see his father , but the master - thief says , " the devil must have prompted you , or how could you have known your son ?"
- " father , let us go ," said the youth . then the father and son set out homeward .
on the way a carriage comes driving by .
hereupon the son says to his father , " i will change myself into a large greyhound , and then you can earn a great deal of money by me ."
then the gentleman calls from the carriage , " my man , will you sell your dog ?"
- " yes ," says the father .
" how much do you want for it ?"
- " thirty thalers ."
- " eh , man , that is a great deal , but as it is such a very fine dog i will have it ."
the gentleman takes it into his carriage , but when they have driven a little farther the dog springs out of the carriage through the window , and goes back to his father , and is no longer a greyhound . they go home together .
next day there is a fair in the neighboring town , so the youth says to his father , " i will now change myself into a beautiful horse , and you can sell me ; but when you have sold me , you must take off my bridle , or i cannot become a man again ."
then the father goes with the horse to the fair , and the master - thief comes and buys the horse for a hundred thalers , but the father forgets , and does not take off the bridle .
so the man goes home with the horse , and puts it in the stable .
when the maid crosses the threshold , the horse says , " take off my bridle , take off my bridle ."
then the maid stands still , and says , " what , canst thou speak ?"
so she goes and takes the bridle off , and the horse becomes a sparrow , and flies out at the door , and the wizard becomes a sparrow also , and flies after him .
then they come together and cast lots , but the master loses , and betakes himself to the water and is a fish .
then the youth also becomes a fish , and they cast lots again , and the master loses .
so the master changes himself into a cock , and the youth becomes a fox , and bites the master ' s head off , and he died and has remained dead to this day .
