there was once an old castle in the midst of a large and thick forest , and in it an old woman who was a witch dwelt all alone .
in the day - time she changed herself into a cat or a screech - owl , but in the evening she took her proper shape again as a human being .
she could lure wild beasts and birds to her , and then she killed and boiled and roasted them .
if any one came within one hundred paces of the castle he was obliged to stand still , and could not stir from the place until she bade him be free .
but whenever an innocent maiden came within this circle , she changed her into a bird , and shut her up in a wicker - work cage , and carried the cage into a room in the castle .
she had about seven thousand cages of rare birds in the castle . now , there was once a maiden who was called jorinda , who was fairer than all other girls .
she and a handsome youth named joringel had promised to marry each other .
they were still in the days of betrothal , and their greatest happiness was being together .
one day in order that they might be able to talk together in quiet they went for a walk in the forest .
" take care ," said joringel , " that you do not go too near the castle .
" it was a beautiful evening ; the sun shone brightly between the trunks of the trees into the dark green of the forest , and the turtle - doves sang mournfully upon the young boughs of the birch - trees . jorinda wept now and then : she sat down in the sunshine and was sorrowful .
joringel was sorrowful too ; they were as sad as if they were about to die .
then they looked around them , and were quite at a loss , for they did not know by which way they should go home .
the sun was still half above the mountain and half set . joringel looked through the bushes , and saw the old walls of the castle close at hand .
he was horror - stricken and filled with deadly fear .
jorinda was singing ," my little bird , with the necklace red , sings sorrow , sorrow , sorrow , he sings that the dove must soon be dead , sings sorrow , sor -- jug , jug , jug .
" joringel looked for jorinda .
she was changed into a nightingale , and sang , " jug , jug , jug ."
a screech - owl with glowing eyes flew three times round about her , and three times cried , " to - whoo , to - whoo , to - whoo !
" joringel could not move : he stood there like a stone , and could neither weep nor speak , nor move hand or foot . the sun had now set .
the owl flew into the thicket , and directly afterwards there came out of it a crooked old woman , yellow and lean , with large red eyes and a hooked nose , the point of which reached to her chin .
she muttered to herself , caught the nightingale , and took it away in her hand . joringel could neither speak nor move from the spot ; the nightingale was gone .
at last the woman came back , and said in a hollow voice , " greet thee , zachiel .
if the moon shines on the cage , zachiel , let him loose at once ."
then joringel was freed .
he fell on his knees before the woman and begged that she would give him back his jorinda , but she said that he should never have her again , and went away .
he called , he wept , he lamented , but all in vain ," ah , what is to become of me ?
" joringel went away , and at last came to a strange village ; there he kept sheep for a long time .
he often walked round and round the castle , but not too near to it .
at last he dreamt one night that he found a blood - red flower , in the middle of which was a beautiful large pearl ; that he picked the flower and went with it to the castle , and that everything he touched with the flower was freed from enchantment ; he also dreamt that by means of it he recovered his jorinda . in the morning , when he awoke , he began to seek over hill and dale if he could find such a flower .
he sought until the ninth day , and then , early in the morning , he found the blood - red flower .
in the middle of it there was a large dew - drop , as big as the finest pearl . day and night he journeyed with this flower to the castle .
when he was within a hundred paces of it he was not held fast , but walked on to the door .
joringel was full of joy ; he touched the door with the flower , and it sprang open .
he walked in through the courtyard , and listened for the sound of the birds .
at last he heard it .
he went on and found the room from whence it came , and there the witch was feeding the birds in the seven thousand cages . when she saw joringel she was angry , very angry , and scolded and spat poison and gall at him , but she could not come within two paces of him .
he did not take any notice of her , but went and looked at the cages with the birds ; but there were many hundred nightingales , how was he to find his jorinda again ? just then he saw the old woman quietly take away a cage with a bird in it , and go towards the door . swiftly he sprang towards her , touched the cage with the flower , and also the old woman .
she could now no longer bewitch any one ; and jorinda was standing there , clasping him round the neck , and she was as beautiful as ever !
