a father once called his three sons before him , and he gave to the first a cock , to the second a scythe , and to the third a cat .
" i am already aged ," said he , " my death is nigh , and i have wished to take thought for you before my end ; money i have not , and what i now give you seems of little worth , but all depends on your making a sensible use of it .
only seek out a country where such things are still unknown , and your fortune is made .
" after the father ' s death the eldest went away with his cock , but wherever he came the cock was already known ; in the towns he saw him from a long distance , sitting upon the steeples and turning round with the wind , and in the villages he heard more than one crowing ; no one would show any wonder at the creature , so that it did not look as if he would make his fortune by it . at last , however , it happened that he came to an island where the people knew nothing about cocks , and did not even understand how to divide their time .
they certainly knew when it was morning or evening , but at night , if they did not sleep through it , not one of them knew how to find out the time ." look !"
said he , " what a proud creature !
it has a ruby - red crown upon its head , and wears spurs like a knight ; it calls you three times during the night , at fixed hours , and when it calls for the last time , the sun soon rises .
but if it crows by broad daylight , then take notice , for there will certainly be a change of weather .
" the people were well pleased ; for a whole night they did not sleep , and listened with great delight as the cock at two , four , and six o ' clock , loudly and clearly proclaimed the time .
they asked if the creature were for sale , and how much he wanted for it ?
" about as much gold as an ass can carry ," answered he .
" a ridiculously small price for such a precious creature !"
they cried unanimously , and willingly gave him what he had asked . when he came home with his wealth his brothers were astonished , and the second said , " well , i will go forth and see whether i cannot get rid of my scythe as profitably ."
but it did not look as if he would , for labourers met him everywhere , and they had scythes upon their shoulders as well as he . at last , however , he chanced upon an island where the people knew nothing of scythes .
when the corn was ripe there , they took cannon out to the fields and shot it down .
now this was rather an uncertain affair ; many shot right over it , others hit the ears instead of the stems , and shot them away , whereby much was lost , and besides all this , it made a terrible noise .
so the man set to work and mowed it down so quietly and quickly that the people opened their mouths with astonishment .
they agreed to give him what he wanted for the scythe , and he received a horse laden with as much gold as it could carry . and now the third brother wanted to take his cat to the right man .
he fared just like the others ; so long as he stayed on the mainland there was nothing to be done .
every place had cats , and there were so many of them that new - born kittens were generally drowned in the ponds . at last he sailed over to an island , and it luckily happened that no cats had ever yet been seen there , and that the mice had got the upper hand so much that they danced upon the tables and benches whether the master were at home or not .
the people complained bitterly of the plague ; the king himself in his palace did not know how to secure himself against them ; mice squeaked in every corner , and gnawed whatever they could lay hold of with their teeth .
but now the cat began her chase , and soon cleared a couple of rooms , and the people begged the king to buy the wonderful beast for the country .
the king willingly gave what was asked , which was a mule laden with gold , and the third brother came home with the greatest treasure of all . the cat made herself merry with the mice in the royal palace , and killed so many that they could not be counted .
at last she grew warm with the work and thirsty , so she stood still , lifted up her head and cried , " mew .
mew !"
when they heard this strange cry , the king and all his people were frightened , and in their terror ran all at once out of the palace .
then the king took counsel what was best to be done ; at last it was determined to send a herald to the cat , and demand that she should leave the palace , or if not , she was to expect that force would be used against her .
the councillors said , " rather will we let ourselves be plagued with the mice , for to that misfortune we are accustomed , than give up our lives to such a monster as this ."
a noble youth , therefore , was sent to ask the cat " whether she would peaceably quit the castle ?"
but the cat , whose thirst had become still greater , merely answered , " mew !
mew !"
the youth understood her to say , " most certainly not !
most certainly not !"
and took this answer to the king .
" then ," said the councillors , " she shall yield to force ."
cannon were brought out , and the palace was soon in flames .
when the fire reached the room where the cat was sitting , she sprang safely out of the window ; but the besiegers did not leave off until the whole palace was shot down to the ground .
