once on a time the fox was talking to the wolf of the strength of man ; how no animal could withstand him , and how all were obliged to employ cunning in order to preserve themselves from him .
then the wolf answered , " if i had but the chance of seeing a man for once , i would set on him notwithstanding ."
- " i can help thee to do that ," said the fox .
" come to me early to - morrow morning , and i will show thee one ."
the wolf presented himself betimes , and the fox took him out on the road by which the huntsmen went daily .
first came an old discharged soldier .
" is that a man ?"
inquired the wolf .
" no ," answered the fox , " that was one ."
afterwards came a little boy who was going to school .
" is that a man ?"
- " no , that is going to be one ."
at length came a hunter with his double - barrelled gun at his back , and hanger by his side .
said the fox to the wolf , " look , there comes a man , thou must attack him , but i will take myself off to my hole ."
the wolf then rushed on the man .
when the huntsman saw him he said , " it is a pity that i have not loaded with a bullet ," aimed , and fired his small shot in his face .
the wolf pulled a very wry face , but did not let himself be frightened , and attacked him again , on which the huntsman gave him the second barrel .
the wolf swallowed his pain , and rushed on the huntsman , but he drew out his bright hanger , and gave him a few cuts with it right and left , so that , bleeding everywhere , he ran howling back to the fox .
" well , brother wolf ," said the fox , " how hast thou got on with man ?"
- " ah !"
replied the wolf , " i never imagined the strength of man to be what it is !
first , he took a stick from his shoulder , and blew into it , and then something flew into my face which tickled me terribly ; then he breathed once more into the stick , and it flew into my nose like lightning and hail ; when i was quite close , he drew a white rib out of his side , and he beat me so with it that i was all but left lying dead ."
- " see what a braggart thou art !"
said the fox .
" thou throwest thy hatchet so far that thou canst not fetch it back again !"
