the wolf had the fox with him , and whatsoever the wolf wished , that the fox was compelled to do , for he was the weaker , and he would gladly have been rid of his master .
it chanced that once as they were going through the forest , the wolf said , " red - fox , get me something to eat , or else i will eat thee thyself ."
then the fox answered , " i know a farm - yard where there are two young lambs ; if thou art inclined , we will fetch one of them ."
that suited the wolf , and they went thither , and the fox stole the little lamb , took it to the wolf , and went away .
the wolf devoured it , but was not satisfied with one ; he wanted the other as well , and went to get it .
as , however , he did it so awkwardly , the mother of the little lamb heard him , and began to cry out terribly , and to bleat so that the farmer came running there .
they found the wolf , and beat him so mercilessly , that he went to the fox limping and howling .
" thou hast misled me finely ," said he ; " i wanted to fetch the other lamb , and the country folks surprised me , and have beaten me to a jelly ."
the fox replied , " why art thou such a glutton ?
" next day they again went into the country , and the greedy wolf once more said , " red - fox , get me something to eat , or i will eat thee thyself ."
then answered the fox , " i know a farm - house where the wife is baking pancakes to - night ; we will get some of them for ourselves ."
they went there , and the fox slipped round the house , and peeped and sniffed about until he discovered where the dish was , and then drew down six pancakes and carried them to the wolf .
" there is something for thee to eat ," said he to him , and then went his way .
the wolf swallowed down the pancakes in an instant , and said , " they make one want more ," and went thither and tore the whole dish down so that it broke in pieces .
this made such a great noise that the woman came out , and when she saw the wolf she called the people , who hurried there , and beat him as long as their sticks would hold together , till with two lame legs , and howling loudly , he got back to the fox in the forest .
" how abominably thou hast misled me !"
cried he , " the peasants caught me , and tanned my skin for me ."
but the fox replied , " why art thou such a glutton ?
" on the third day , when they were out together , and the wolf could only limp along painfully , he again said , " red - fox , get me something to eat , or i will eat thee thyself ."
the fox answered , " i know a man who has been killing , and the salted meat is lying in a barrel in the cellar ; we will get that ."
said the wolf , " i will go when thou dost , that thou mayest help me if i am not able to get away ."
- " i am willing ," said the fox , and showed him the by - paths and ways by which at length they reached the cellar .
there was meat in abundance , and the wolf attacked it instantly and thought , " there is plenty of time before i need leave off !"
the fox liked it also , but looked about everywhere , and often ran to the hole by which they had come in , and tried if his body was still thin enough to slip through it .
the wolf said , " dear fox , tell me why thou art running here and there so much , and jumping in and out ?
"" i must see that no one is coming ," replied the crafty fellow .
" don ' t eat too much !"
then said the wolf , " i shall not leave until the barrel is empty ."
in the meantime the farmer , who had heard the noise of the fox ' s jumping , came into the cellar .
when the fox saw him he was out of the hole at one bound .
the wolf wanted to follow him , but he had made himself so fat with eating that he could no longer get through , but stuck fast .
then came the farmer with a cudgel and struck him dead , but the fox bounded into the forest , glad to be rid of the old glutton .
