the she - wolf brought forth a young one , and invited the fox to be godfather .
" after all , he is a near relative of ours ," said she , " he has a good understanding , and much talent ; he can instruct my little son , and help him forward in the world ."
the fox , too , appeared quite honest , and said , " worthy mrs .
gossip , i thank you for the honour which you are doing me ; i will , however , conduct myself in such a way that you shall be repaid for it ."
he enjoyed himself at the feast , and made merry ; afterwards he said , " dear mrs .
gossip , it is our duty to take care of the child , it must have good food that it may be strong .
i know a sheep - fold from which we might fetch a nice morsel ."
the wolf was pleased with the ditty , and she went out with the fox to the farm - yard .
he pointed out the fold from afar , and said , " you will be able to creep in there without being seen , and in the meantime i will look about on the other side to see if i can pick up a chicken ."
he , however , did not go there , but sat down at the entrance to the forest , stretched his legs and rested .
the she - wolf crept into the stable .
a dog was lying there , and it made such a noise that the peasants came running out , caught gossip wolf , and poured a strong burning mixture , which had been prepared for washing , over her skin .
at last she escaped , and dragged herself outside .
there lay the fox , who pretended to be full of complaints , and said , " ah , dear mistress gossip , how ill i have fared , the peasants have fallen on me , and have broken every limb i have ; if you do not want me to lie where i am and perish , you must carry me away ."
the she - wolf herself was only able to go away slowly , but she was in such concern about the fox that she took him on her back , and slowly carried him perfectly safe and sound to her house .
then the fox cried to her , " farewell , dear mistress gossip , may the roasting you have had do you good ," laughed heartily at her , and bounded off .
