there was once a cook named grethel , who wore shoes with red rosettes , and when she walked out with them on , she turned herself this way and that , and thought , " you certainly are a pretty girl !"
and when she came home she drank , in her gladness of heart , a draught of wine , and as wine excites a desire to eat , she tasted the best of whatever she was cooking until she was satisfied , and said , " the cook must know what the food is like .
" it came to pass that the master one day said to her , " grethel , there is a guest coming this evening ; prepare me two fowls very daintily ."
- " i will see to it , master ," answered grethel .
she killed two fowls , scalded them , plucked them , put them on the spit , and towards evening set them before the fire , that they might roast .
the fowls began to turn brown , and were nearly ready , but the guest had not yet arrived .
then grethel called out to her master , " if the guest does not come , i must take the fowls away from the fire , but it will be a sin and a shame if they are not eaten directly , when they are juiciest ."
the master said , " i will run myself , and fetch the guest ."
when the master had turned his back , grethel laid the spit with the fowls on one side , and thought , " standing so long by the fire there , makes one hot and thirsty ; who knows when they will come ?
meanwhile , i will run into the cellar , and take a drink ."
she ran down , set a jug , said , " god bless it to thy use , grethel ," and took a good drink , and took yet another hearty draught . then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire , basted them , and drove the spit merrily round .
but as the roast meat smelt so good , grethel thought , " something might be wrong , it ought to be tasted !"
she touched it with her finger , and said , " ah !
how good fowls are !
it certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten directly !"
she ran to the window , to see if the master was not coming with his guest , but she saw no one , and went back to the fowls and thought , " one of the wings is burning !
i had better take it off and eat it ."
so she cut it off , ate it , and enjoyed it , and when she had done , she thought , " the other must go down too , or else master will observe that something is missing ."
when the two wings were eaten , she went and looked for her master , and did not see him .
it suddenly occurred to her , " who knows ?
they are perhaps not coming at all , and have turned in somewhere ."
then she said , " hallo , grethel , enjoy yourself , one fowl has been cut into , take another drink , and eat it up entirely ; when it is eaten you will have some peace , why should god ' s good gifts be spoilt ?"
so she ran into the cellar again , took an enormous drink and ate up the one chicken in great glee .
when one of the chickens was swallowed down , and still her master did not come , grethel looked at the other and said , " where one is , the other should be likewise , the two go together ; what ' s right for the one is right for the other ; i think if i were to take another draught it would do me no harm ."
so she took another hearty drink , and let the second chicken rejoin the first . while she was just in the best of the eating , her master came and cried , hurry up , " haste thee , grethel , the guest is coming directly after me !"
- " yes , sir , i will soon serve up ," answered grethel .
meantime the master looked to see that the table was properly laid , and took the great knife , wherewith he was going to carve the chickens , and sharpened it on the steps .
presently the guest came , and knocked politely and courteously at the house - door .
grethel ran , and looked to see who was there , and when she saw the guest , she put her finger to her lips and said , " hush !
hush !
get away as quickly as you can , if my master catches you it will be the worse for you ; he certainly did ask you to supper , but his intention is to cut off your two ears .
just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it !"
the guest heard the sharpening , and hurried down the steps again as fast as he could .
grethel was not idle ; she ran screaming to her master , and cried , " you have invited a fine guest !"
- " eh , why , grethel ?
what do you mean by that ?"
- " yes ," said she , " he has taken the chickens which i was just going to serve up , off the dish , and has run away with them !"
- " that ' s a nice trick !"
said her master , and lamented the fine chickens .
" if he had but left me one , so that something remained for me to eat ."
he called to him to stop , but the guest pretended not to hear .
then he ran after him with the knife still in his hand , crying , " just one , just one ," meaning that the guest should leave him just one chicken , and not take both .
the guest , however , thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of his ears , and ran as if fire were burning under him , in order to take them both home with him .
