once upon a time the little hen went with the little cock to the nut - hill , and they agreed together that whichsoever of them found a kernel of a nut should share it with the other .
then the hen found a large , large nut , but said nothing about it , intending to eat the kernel herself .
the kernel , however , was so large that she could not swallow it , and it remained sticking in her throat , so that she was alarmed lest she should be choked .
then she cried , " cock , i entreat thee to run as fast thou canst , and fetch me some water , or i shall choke ."
the little cock did run as fast as he could to the spring , and said , " stream , thou art to give me some water ; the little hen is lying on the nut - hill , and she has swallowed a large nut , and is choking ."
the well answered , " first run to the bride , and get her to give thee some red silk ."
the little cock ran to the bride and said , " bride , you are to give me some red silk ; i want to give red silk to the well , the well is to give me some water , i am to take the water to the little hen who is lying on the nut - hill and has swallowed a great nut - kernel , and is choking with it ."
the bride answered , " first run and bring me my little wreath which is hanging to a willow ."
so the little cock ran to the willow , and drew the wreath from the branch and took it to the bride , and the bride gave him some water for it .
then the little cock took the water to the hen , but when he got there the hen had choked in the meantime , and lay there dead and motionless .
then the cock was so distressed that he cried aloud , and every animal came to lament the little hen , and six mice built a little carriage to carry her to her grave , and when the carriage was ready they harnessed themselves to it , and the cock drove .
on the way , however , they met the fox , who said , " where art thou going , little cock ?"
- " i am going to bury my little hen ."
- " may i drive with thee ?"
- " yes , but seat thyself at the back of the carriage , for in the front my little horses could not drag thee ."
then the fox seated himself at the back , and after that the wolf , the bear , the stag , the lion , and all the beasts of the forest did the same .
then the procession went onwards , and they reached the stream .
" how are we to get over ?"
said the little cock .
a straw was lying by the stream , and it said , " i will lay myself across , and you shall drive over me ."
but when the six mice came to the bridge , the straw slipped and fell into the water , and the six mice all fell in and were drowned .
then they were again in difficulty , and a coal came and said , " i am large enough , i will lay myself across and you shall drive over me ."
so the coal also laid itself across the water , but unhappily just touched it , on which the coal hissed , was extinguished and died .
when a stone saw that , it took pity on the little cock , wished to help him , and laid itself over the water .
then the cock drew the carriage himself , but when he got it over and reached the other shore with the dead hen , and was about to draw over the others who were sitting behind as well , there were too many of them , the carriage ran back , and they all fell into the water together , and were drowned .
then the little cock was left alone with the dead hen , and dug a grave for her and laid her in it , and made a mound above it , on which he sat down and fretted until he died too , and then every one was dead .
