hans had served his master for seven years , so he said to him , " master , my time is up ; now i should be glad to go back home to my mother ; give me my wages ."
the master answered , " you have served me faithfully and honestly ; as the service was so shall the reward be ;" and he gave hans a piece of gold as big as his head .
hans pulled his handkerchief out of his pocket , wrapped up the lump in it , put it on his shoulder , and set out on the way home . as he went on , always putting one foot before the other , he saw a horseman trotting quickly and merrily by on a lively horse .
" ah !"
said hans quite loud , " what a fine thing it is to ride !
there you sit as on a chair ; you stumble over no stones , you save your shoes , and get on , you don ' t know how .
" the rider , who had heard him , stopped and called out , " hollo !
hans , why do you go on foot , then ?
"" i must ," answered he , " for i have this lump to carry home ; it is true that it is gold , but i cannot hold my head straight for it , and it hurts my shoulder .
"" i will tell you what ," said the rider , " we will exchange : i will give you my horse , and you can give me your lump .
"" with all my heart ," said hans , " but i can tell you , you will have to crawl along with it .
" the rider got down , took the gold , and helped hans up ; then gave him the bridle tight in his hands and said , " if you want to go at a really good pace , you must click your tongue and call out , " jup !
jup !
" hans was heartily delighted as he sat upon the horse and rode away so bold and free .
after a little while he thought that it ought to go faster , and he began to click with his tongue and call out , " jup !
jup !"
the horse put himself into a sharp trot , and before hans knew where he was , he was thrown off and lying in a ditch which separated the field from the highway .
the horse would have gone off too if it had not been stopped by a countryman , who was coming along the road and driving a cow before him . hans got his limbs together and stood up on his legs again , but he was vexed , and said to the countryman , " it is a poor joke , this riding , especially when one gets hold of a mare like this , that kicks and throws one off , so that one has a chance of breaking one ' s neck .
never again will i mount it .
now i like your cow , for one can walk quietly behind her , and have , over and above , one ' s milk , butter and cheese every day without fail .
what would i not give to have such a cow ."
- " well ," said the countryman , " if it would give you so much pleasure , i do not mind giving the cow for the horse ."
hans agreed with the greatest delight ; the countryman jumped upon the horse , and rode quickly away . hans drove his cow quietly before him , and thought over his lucky bargain .
" if only i have a morsel of bread -- and that can hardly fail me -- i can eat butter and cheese with it as often as i like ; if i am thirsty , i can milk my cow and drink the milk .
good heart , what more can i want ?
" when he came to an inn he made a halt , and in his great content ate up what he had with him -- his dinner and supper -- and all he had , and with his last few farthings had half a glass of beer .
then he drove his cow onwards along the road to his mother ' s village . as it drew nearer mid - day , the heat was more oppressive , and hans found himself upon a moor which it took about an hour to cross .
he felt it very hot and his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth with thirst .
" i can find a cure for this ," thought hans ; " i will milk the cow now and refresh myself with the milk ."
he tied her to a withered tree , and as he had no pail he put his leather cap underneath ; but try as he would , not a drop of milk came .
and as he set himself to work in a clumsy way , the impatient beast at last gave him such a blow on his head with its hind foot , that he fell on the ground , and for a long time could not think where he was . by good fortune a butcher just then came along the road with a wheel - barrow , in which lay a young pig .
" what sort of a trick is this ?"
cried he , and helped the good hans up .
hans told him what had happened .
the butcher gave him his flask and said , " take a drink and refresh yourself .
the cow will certainly give no milk , it is an old beast ; at the best it is only fit for the plough , or for the butcher ."
- " well , well ," said hans , as he stroked his hair down on his head , " who would have thought it ?
certainly it is a fine thing when one can kill a beast like that at home ; what meat one has !
but i do not care much for beef , it is not juicy enough for me .
a young pig like that now is the thing to have , it tastes quite different ; and then there are the sausages !
"" hark ye , hans ," said the butcher , " out of love for you i will exchange , and will let you have the pig for the cow ."
- " heaven repay you for your kindness !"
said hans as he gave up the cow , whilst the pig was unbound from the barrow , and the cord by which it was tied was put in his hand . hans went on , and thought to himself how everything was going just as he wished ; if he did meet with any vexation it was immediately set right .
presently there joined him a lad who was carrying a fine white goose under his arm .
they said good morning to each other , and hans began to tell of his good luck , and how he had always made such good bargains .
the boy told him that he was taking the goose to a christening - feast .
" just lift her ," added he , and laid hold of her by the wings ; " how heavy she is -- she has been fattened up for the last eight weeks .
whoever has a bit of her when she is roasted will have to wipe the fat from both sides of his mouth ."
- " yes ," said hans , as he weighed her in one hand , " she is a good weight , but my pig is no bad one .
" meanwhile the lad looked suspiciously from one side to the other , and shook his head .
" look here ," he said at length , " it may not be all right with your pig .
in the village through which i passed , the mayor himself had just had one stolen out of its sty .
i fear -- i fear that you have got hold of it there .
they have sent out some people and it would be a bad business if they caught you with the pig ; at the very least , you would be shut up in the dark hole .
" the good hans was terrified .
" goodness !"
he said , " help me out of this fix ; you know more about this place than i do , take my pig and leave me your goose ."
- " i shall risk something at that game ," answered the lad , " but i will not be the cause of your getting into trouble ."
so he took the cord in his hand , and drove away the pig quickly along a by - path . the good hans , free from care , went homewards with the goose under his arm .
" when i think over it properly ," said he to himself , " i have even gained by the exchange ; first there is the good roast - meat , then the quantity of fat which will drip from it , and which will give me dripping for my bread for a quarter of a year , and lastly the beautiful white feathers ; i will have my pillow stuffed with them , and then indeed i shall go to sleep without rocking .
how glad my mother will be !
" as he was going through the last village , there stood a scissors - grinder with his barrow ; as his wheel whirred he sang -- " i sharpen scissors and quickly grind , my coat blows out in the wind behind ."
hans stood still and looked at him ; at last he spoke to him and said , " all ' s well with you , as you are so merry with your grinding ."
- " yes ," answered the scissors - grinder , " the trade has a golden foundation .
a real grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into his pocket finds gold in it .
but where did you buy that fine goose ?
"" i did not buy it , but exchanged my pig for it .
"" and the pig ?
"" that i got for a cow .
"" and the cow ?
"" i took that instead of a horse .
"" and the horse ?
"" for that i gave a lump of gold as big as my head .
"" and the gold ?
"" well , that was my wages for seven years ' service .
"" you have known how to look after yourself each time ," said the grinder .
" if you can only get on so far as to hear the money jingle in your pocket whenever you stand up , you will have made your fortune .
"" how shall i manage that ?"
said hans .
" you must be a grinder , as i am ; nothing particular is wanted for it but a grindstone , the rest finds itself .
i have one here ; it is certainly a little worn , but you need not give me anything for it but your goose ; will you do it ?
"" how can you ask ?"
answered hans .
" i shall be the luckiest fellow on earth ; if i have money whenever i put my hand in my pocket , what need i trouble about any longer ?"
and he handed him the goose and received the grindstone in exchange .
" now ," said the grinder , as he took up an ordinary heavy stone that lay by him , " here is a strong stone for you into the bargain ; you can hammer well upon it , and straighten your old nails .
take it with you and keep it carefully .
" hans loaded himself with the stones , and went on with a contented heart ; his eyes shone with joy .
" i must have been born with a caul ," he cried ; " everything i want happens to me just as if i were a sunday - child .
" meanwhile , as he had been on his legs since daybreak , he began to feel tired .
hunger also tormented him , for in his joy at the bargain by which he got the cow he had eaten up all his store of food at once .
at last he could only go on with great trouble , and was forced to stop every minute ; the stones , too , weighed him down dreadfully .
then he could not help thinking how nice it would be if he had not to carry them just then . he crept like a snail to a well in a field , and there he thought that he would rest and refresh himself with a cool draught of water , but in order that he might not injure the stones in sitting down , he laid them carefully by his side on the edge of the well .
then he sat down on it , and was to stoop and drink , when he made a slip , pushed against the stones , and both of them fell into the water .
when hans saw them with his own eyes sinking to the bottom , he jumped for joy , and then knelt down , and with tears in his eyes thanked god for having shown him this favour also , and delivered him in so good a way , and without his having any need to reproach himself , from those heavy stones which had been the only things that troubled him .
" there is no man under the sun so fortunate as i ," he cried out .
with a light heart and free from every burden he now ran on until he was with his mother at home .
