there was a widow ere now , and she had three daughters ; and they said to her that they would go to seek their fortune .
she baked three bannocks .
she said to the big one , " whether dost thou like best the half and my blessing , or the big half and my curse ?"
" i like best ," said she , " the big half and thy curse ."
she said to the middle one , " whether dost thou like best the big half and my curse , or the , little half and my blessing ?"
" i like best ," said she , " the big half and thy curse ."
she said to the little one , " whether dost thou like best the big half and my curse , or the little half and my blessing ?"
" i like best the little half and thy blessing ."
this pleased her mother , and she gave her the two other halves also .
they went away , but the two eldest did not want the youngest to be with them , and they tied her to a rock of stone .
they went on , but her mother ' s blessing came and freed her .
and when they looked behind them , whom did they see but her with the rock on top of her .
they let her alone a turn of a while , till they reached a peat stack , and they tied her to the peat stack .
they went on a bit ( but her mother ' s blessing came and freed her ), and they looked behind them , and whom did they see but her coming , and the peat stack on the top of her .
they let her alone a turn of a while , till they reached a tree , and they tied her to the tree .
they went on a bit ( but her mother ' s blessing came and freed her ), and when they looked behind them , whom did they see but her , and the tree on top of her . they saw it was no good to be at her ; they loosed her , and let her ( come ) with them .
they were going till night came on them .
they saw a light a long way from them ; and though a long way from them , it was not long that they were in reaching it .
they went in .
what was this but a giant ' s house !
they asked to stop the night .
they got that , and they were put to bed with the three daughters of the giant .
( the giant came home , and he said , " the smell of the foreign girls is within .")
there were twists of amber knobs about the necks of the giant ' s daughters , and strings of horse hair about their necks .
they all slept , but maol a chliobain did not sleep .
through the night a thirst came on the giant .
he called to his bald , rough - skinned gillie to bring him water .
the rough - skinned gillie said that there was not a drop within .
kill ," said he , " one of the strange girls , and bring to me her blood ."
how will i know them ?"
said the bald , rough - skinned gillie .
" there are twists of knobs of amber about the necks of my daughters , and twists of horse hair about the necks of the rest .
" maol a chliobain heard the giant , and as quick as she could she put the strings of horse hair that were about her own neck and about the necks of her sisters about the necks of the giant ' s daughters ; and the knobs that were about the necks of the giant ' s daughters about her own neck and about the necks of her sisters ; and she laid down so quietly .
the bald , rough - skinned gillie came , and he killed one of the daughters of the giant , and he took the blood to him .
he asked for more to be brought him .
he killed the next .
he asked for more ; and he killed the third one . maol a chliobain awoke her sisters , and she took them with her on top of her , and she took to going .
( she took with her a golden cloth that was on the bed , and it called out .
) the giant perceived her , and he followed her .
the sparks of fire that she was putting out of the stones with her heels , they were striking the giant on the chin ; and the sparks of fire that the giant was bringing out of the stones with the points of his feet , they were striking maol a chliobain in the back of the head .
it is this was their going till they reached a river .
( she plucked a hair out of her head and made a bridge of it , and she run over the river , and the giant could not follow her .)
maol a chliobain leaped the river , but the river the giant could not leap .
" thou art over there , maol a chliobain ."
" i am , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou killedst my three bald brown daughters ."
" i killed them , though it is hard for thee ."
" and when wilt thou come again ?"
" i will come when my business brings me .
" they went on forward till they reached the house of a farmer .
the farmer had three sons .
they told how it happened to them .
said the farmer to maol a chliobain , " i will give my eldest son to thy eldest sister , and get for me the fine comb of gold , and the coarse comb of silver that the giant has ."
" it will cost thee no more ," said maol a chliobain . she went away ; she reached the house of the giant ; she got in unknown ; she took with her the combs , and out she went .
the giant perceived her , and after her he was till they reached the river .
she leaped the river , but the river the giant could not leap .
" thou art over there , maol a chliobain ."
" i am , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou killedst my three bald brown daughters ."
" i killed them , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou stolest my fine comb of gold , and my coarse comb of silver ."
" i stole them , though it is hard for thee ."
" when wilt thou come again ?"
" i will come when my business brings me .
" she gave the combs to the farmer , and her big sister and the farmer ' s big son married .
" i will give my middle son to thy middle sister , and get me the giant ' s glave of light ."
" it will cost thee no more ," said maol a chliobain .
she went away , and she reached the giant ' s house ; she went up to the top of a tree that was above the giant ' s well .
in the night came the bald rough - skinned gillie with the sword of light to fetch water .
when he bent to raise the water , maol a chliobain came down and she pushed him down in the well and she drowned him , and she took with her the glave of light . the giant followed her till she reached the river ; she leaped the river , and the giant could not follow her .
" thou art over there , maol a chliobain ."
" i am , if it is hard for thee ."
" thou killedst my three bald brown daughters ."
" i killed , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou stolest my fine comb of gold , and my coarse comb of silver ."
" i stole , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou killedst my bald rough - skinned gillie ."
" i killed , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou stolest my glave of light ."
" i stole , though it is hard for thee ."
" when wilt thou come again ?"
" i will come when my business brings me ."
she reachedthe house of the farmer with the glave of light ; and her middle sister and the middle son of the farmer married .
" i will give thyself my youngest son ," said the farmer , " and bring me a buck that the giant has ."
" it will cost thee no more ," said maol a chliobain .
she went away , and she reached the house of the giant ; but when she had hold of the buck , the giant caught her .
" what ," said the giant , " wouldst thou do to me : if i had done as much harm to thee as thou hast done to me , i would make thee burst thyself with milk porridge ; i would then put thee in a pock !
i would hang thee to the roof - tree ; i would set fire under thee ; and i would set on thee with clubs till thou shouldst fall as a faggot of withered sticks on the floor ."
the giant made milk porridge , and he made her drink it .
she put the milk porridge about her mouth and face , and she laid over as if she were dead .
the giant put her in a pock , and he hung her to the roof - tree ; and he went away , himself and his men , to get wood to the forest .
the giant ' s mother was within .
when the giant was gone , maol a chliobain began --"’ tis i am in the light !
’ tis i am in the city of gold !"
" wilt thou let me in ?"
said the carlin .
" i will not let thee in ."
at last she let down the pock .
she put in the carlin , cat , and calf , and cream - dish .
she took with her the buck and she went away .
when the giant came with his men , himself and his men began at the bag with the clubs .
the carlin was calling , "’ tis myself that ' s in it ."
" i know that thyself is in it ," would the giant say , as he laid on to the pock .
the pock came down as a faggot of sticks , and what was in it but his mother .
when the giant saw how it was , he took after maol a chliobain ; he followed her till she reached the river .
maol a chliobain leaped the river , and the giant could not leap it .
" thou art over there , maol a chliobain ."
" i am , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou killedst my three bald brown daughters ."
" i killed , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou stolest , my golden comb ; and my silver comb ."
" i stole , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou killedst my bald rough - skinned gillie ."
" i killed , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou stolest my glave of light ."
" i stole , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou killedst my mother ."
" i killed , though it is hard for thee ."
" thou stolest my buck ."
" i stole , though it is hard for these ."
" when wilt thou come again ?"
" i will come when my business brings me ."
" if thou wert over here , and i yonder ," said the giant , what wouldst thou do to follow me ?"
" i would stick myself down , and i would drink till i should dry the river ."
the giant stuck himself down , and he drank till he burst .
maol a chliobain and the farmer ' s youngest son married .
