there was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a little cottage , and who earned their bread by fishing , and always lived from hand to mouth .
but it came to pass one day when the man was sitting by the water - side , and casting his net , that he drew out a fish entirely of gold .
as he was looking at the fish , full of astonishment , it began to speak and said , " hark you , fisherman , if you will throw me back again into the water , i will change your little hut into a splendid castle ."
then the fisherman answered , " of what use is a castle to me , if i have nothing to eat ?"
the gold fish continued , " that shall be taken care of , there will be a cupboard in the castle in which , when you open it , shall be dishes of the most delicate meats , and as many of them as you can desire ."
- " if that be true ," said the man , " then i can well do you a favour ."
- " yes ," said the fish , " there is , however , the condition that you shall disclose to no one in the world , whosoever he may be , whence your good luck has come , if you speak but one single word , all will be over ."
then the man threw the wonderful fish back again into the water , and went home .
but where his hovel had formerly stood , now stood a great castle .
he opened wide his eyes , entered , and saw his wife dressed in beautiful clothes , sitting in a splendid room , and she was quite delighted , and said , " husband , how has all this come to pass ?
it suits me very well ."
- " yes ," said the man , " it suits me too , but i am frightfully hungry , just give me something to eat ."
said the wife , " but i have got nothing and don ' t know where to find anything in this new house ."
- " there is no need of your knowing ," said the man , " for i see yonder a great cupboard , just unlock it ."
when she opened it , there stood cakes , meat , fruit , wine , quite a bright prospect . then the woman cried joyfully , " what more can you want , my dear ?"
and they sat down , and ate and drank together .
when they had had enough , the woman said , " but husband , whence come all these riches ?"
- " alas ," answered he , " do not question me about it , for i dare not tell you anything ; if i disclose it to any one , then all our good fortune will fly ."
- " very good ," said she , " if i am not to know anything , then i do not want to know anything ."
however , she was not in earnest ; she never rested day or night , and she goaded her husband until in his impatience he revealed that all was owing to a wonderful golden fish which he had caught , and to which in return he had given its liberty .
and as soon as the secret was out , the splendid castle with the cupboard immediately disappeared , they were once more in the old fisherman ' s hut , and the man was obliged to follow his former trade and fish .
but fortune would so have it , that he once more drew out the golden fish .
" listen ," said the fish , " if you will throw me back into the water again , i will once more give you the castle with the cupboard full of roast and boiled meats ; only be firm , for your life ' s sake don ' t reveal from whom you have it , or you will lose it all again !"
- " i will take good care ," answered the fisherman , and threw the fish back into the water .
now at home everything was once more in its former magnificence , and the wife was overjoyed at their good fortune , but curiosity left her no peace , so that after a couple of days she began to ask again how it had come to pass , and how he had managed to secure it .
the man kept silence for a short time , but at last she made him so angry that he broke out , and betrayed the secret .
in an instant the castle disappeared , and they were back again in their old hut .
" now you have got what you want ," said he ; " and we can gnaw at a bare bone again ."
- " ah ," said the woman , " i had rather not have riches if i am not to know from whom they come , for then i have no peace .
" the man went back to fish , and after a while he chanced to draw out the gold fish for a third time .
" listen ," said the fish , " i see very well that i am fated to fall into your hands , take me home and cut me into six pieces ; give your wife two of them to eat , two to your horse and bury two of them in the ground , then they will bring you a blessing ."
the fisherman took the fish home with him , and did as it had bidden him .
it came to pass , however , that from the two pieces that were buried in the ground two golden lilies sprang up , that the horse had two golden foals , and the fisherman ' s wife bore two children who were made entirely of gold .
the children grew up , became tall and handsome , and the lilies and horses grew likewise .
then they said , " father , we want to mount our golden steeds and travel out in the world ."
but he answered sorrowfully , " how shall i bear it if you go away , and i know not how it fares with you ?"
then they said , " the two golden lilies remain here .
by them you can see how it is with us ; if they are fresh , then we are in health ; if they are withered , we are ill ; if they perish , then we are dead ."
so they rode forth and came to an inn , in which were many people , and when they perceived the gold - children they began to laugh , and jeer .
when one of them heard the mocking he felt ashamed and would not go out into the world , but turned back and went home again to his father .
but the other rode forward and reached a great forest .
as he was about to enter it , the people said , it is not safe for you to ride through , the wood is full of robbers who would treat you badly .
you will fare ill , and when they see that you are all of gold , and your horse likewise , they will assuredly kill you .
' but he would not allow himself to be frightened , and said , " i must and will ride through it ."
then he took bear - skins and covered himself and his horse with them , so that the gold was no more to be seen , and rode fearlessly into the forest .
when he had ridden onward a little he heard a rustling in the bushes , and heard voices speaking together .
from one side came cries of , " there is one ," but from the other , " let him go , ' tis an idle fellow , as poor and bare as a church - mouse , what should we gain from him ?
" so the gold - child rode joyfully through the forest , and no evil befell him .
one day he entered a village wherein he saw a maiden , who was so beautiful that he did not believe that any more beautiful than she existed in the world .
and as such a mighty love took possession of him , he went up to her and said , " i love thee with my whole heart , wilt thou be my wife ?"
he , too , pleased the maiden so much that she agreed and said , " yes , i will be thy wife , and be true to thee my whole life long ."
then they were married , and just as they were in the greatest happiness , home came the father of the bride , and when he saw that his daughter ' s wedding was being celebrated , he was astonished , and said , " where is the bridegroom ?"
they showed him the gold - child , who , however , still wore his bear - skins .
then the father said wrathfully , " a vagabond shall never have my daughter !"
and was about to kill him .
then the bride begged as hard as she could , and said , " he is my husband , and i love him with all my heart !"
until at last he allowed himself to be appeased .
nevertheless the idea never left his thoughts , so that next morning he rose early , wishing to see whether his daughter ' s husband was a common ragged beggar .
but when he peeped in , he saw a magnificent golden man in the bed , and the cast - off bear - skins lying on the ground .
then he went back and thought , " what a good thing it was that i restrained my anger !
i should have committed a great crime ."
but the gold - child dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag , and when he awoke in the morning , he said to his wife , " i must go out hunting ."
she was uneasy , and begged him to stay there , and said , " you might easily meet with a great misfortune ," but he answered , " i must and will go .
" thereupon he got up , and rode forth into the forest , and it was not long before a fine stag crossed his path exactly according to his dream .
he aimed and was about to shoot it , when the stag ran away .
he gave chase over hedges and ditches for the whole day without feeling tired , but in the evening the stag vanished from his sight , and when the gold - child looked round him , he was standing before a little house , wherein was a witch .
he knocked , and a little old woman came out and asked , " what are you doing so late in the midst of the great forest ?"
- " have you not seen a stag ?"
- " yes ," answered she , " i know the stag well ," and thereupon a little dog which had come out of the house with her , barked at the man violently .
" wilt thou be silent , thou odious toad ," said he , " or i will shoot thee dead ."
then the witch cried out in a passion , " what !
will you slay my little dog ?"
and immediately transformed him , so that he lay like a stone , and his bride awaited him in vain and thought , " that which i so greatly dreaded , which lay so heavily on my heart , has come upon him !"
but at home the other brother was standing by the gold - lilies , when one of them suddenly drooped .
" good heavens !"
said he , " my brother has met with some great misfortune !
i must away to see if i can possibly rescue him ."
then the father said , " stay here , if i lose you also , what shall i do ?"
but he answered , " i must and will go forth !
" then he mounted his golden horse , and rode forth and entered the great forest , where his brother lay turned to stone .
the old witch came out of her house and called him , wishing to entrap him also , but he did not go near her , and said , " i will shoot you , if you will not bring my brother to life again ."
she touched the stone , though very unwillingly , with her forefinger , and he was immediately restored to his human shape .
but the two gold - children rejoiced when they saw each other again , kissed and caressed each other , and rode away together out of the forest , the one home to his bride , and the other to his father .
the father then said , " i knew well that you had rescued your brother , for the golden lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again ."
then they lived happily , and all prospered with them until their death .
