there were once a king and a queen , and they had a son called sigurd , who was very strong and active , and good - looking .
when the king came to be bowed down with the weight of years he spoke to his son , and said that now it was time for him to look out for a fitting match for himself , for he did not know how long he might last now , and he would like to see him married before he died . sigurd was not averse to this , and asked his father where he thought it best to look for a wife .
the king answered that in a certain country there was a king who had a beautiful daughter , and he thought it would be most desirable if sigurd could get her .
so the two parted , and sigurd prepared for the journey , and went to where his father had directed him .
he came to the king and asked his daughter ’ s hand , which he readily granted him , but only on the condition that he should remain there as long as he could , for the king himself was not strong and not very able to govern his kingdom .
sigurd accepted this condition , but added that he would have to get leave to go home again to his own country when he heard news of his father ’ s death .
after that sigurd married the princess , and helped his father - in - law to govern the kingdom .
he and the princess loved each other dearly , and after a year a son came to them , who was two years old when word came to sigurd that his father was dead .
sigurd now prepared to return home with his wife and child , and went on board ship to go by sea . they had sailed for several days , when the breeze suddenly fell , and there came a dead calm , at a time when they needed only one day ’ s voyage to reach home .
sigurd and his queen were one day on deck , when most of the others on the ship had fallen asleep .
there they sat and talked for a while , and had their little son along with them .
after a time sigurd became so heavy with sleep that he could no longer keep awake , so he went below and lay down , leaving the queen alone on the deck , playing with her son .
a good while after sigurd had gone below the queen saw something black on the sea , which seemed to be coming nearer .
as it approached she could make out that it was a boat , and could see the figure of some one sitting in it and rowing it .
at last the boat came alongside the ship , and now the queen saw that it was a stone boat , out of which there came up on board the ship a fearfully ugly witch .
the queen was more frightened than words can describe , and could neither speak a word nor move from the place so as to awaken the king or the sailors .
the witch came right up to the queen , took the child from her and laid it on the deck ; then she took the queen , and stripped her of all her fine clothes , which she proceeded to put on herself , and looked then like a human being .
last of all she took the queen , put her into the boat , and said —‘ this spell i lay upon you , that you slacken not your course until you come to my brother in the underworld .’ the queen sat stunned and motionless , but the boat at once shot away from the ship with her , and before long she was out of sight . when the boat could no longer be seen the child began to cry , and though the witch tried to quiet it she could not manage it ; so she went below to where the king was sleeping with the child on her arm , and awakened him , scolding him for leaving them alone on deck , while he and all the crew were asleep .
it was great carelessness of him , she said , to leave no one to watch the ship with her . sigurd was greatly surprised to hear his queen scold him so much , for she had never said an angry word to him before ; but he thought it was quite excusable in this case , and tried to quiet the child along with her , but it was no use .
then he went and wakened the sailors , and bade them hoist the sails , for a breeze had sprung up and was blowing straight towards the harbour .
they soon reached the land which sigurd was to rule over , and found all the people sorrowful for the old king ’ s death , but they became glad when they got sigurd back to the court , and made him king over them . the king ’ s son , however , hardly ever stopped crying from the time he had been taken from his mother on the deck of the ship , although he had always been such a good child before , so that at last the king had to get a nurse for him — one of the maids of the court .
as soon as the child got into her charge he stopped crying , and behaved well as before . after the sea - voyage it seemed to the king that the queen had altered very much in many ways , and not for the better .
he thought her much more haughty and stubborn and difficult to deal with than she used to be .
before long others began to notice this as well as the king .
in the court there were two young fellows , one of eighteen years old , the other of nineteen , who were very fond of playing chess , and often sat long inside playing at it .
their room was next the queen ’ s , and often during the day they heard the queen talking . one day they paid more attention than usual when they heard her talk , and put their ears close to a crack in the wall between the rooms , and heard the queen say quite plainly , ‘ when i yawn a little , then i am a nice little maiden ; when i yawn half - way , then i am half a troll ; and when i yawn fully , then i am a troll altogether .’ as she said this she yawned tremendously , and in a moment had put on the appearance of a fearfully ugly troll .
then there came up through the floor of the room a three - headed giant with a trough full of meat , who saluted her as his sister and set down the trough before her .
she began to eat out of it , and never stopped till she had finished it .
the young fellows saw all this going on , but did not hear the two of them say anything to each other .
they were astonished though at how greedily the queen devoured the meat , and how much she ate of it , and were no longer surprised that she took so little when she sat at table with the king .
as soon as she had finished it the giant disappeared with the trough by the same way as he had come , and the queen returned to her human shape . now we must go back to the king ’ s son after he had been put in charge of the nurse .
one evening , after she had lit a candle and was holding the child , several planks sprang up in the floor of the room , and out at the opening came a beautiful woman dressed in white , with an iron belt round her waist , to which was fastened an iron chain that went down into the ground .
the woman came up to the nurse , took the child from her , and pressed it to her breast ; then she gave it back to the nurse and returned by the same way as she had come , and the floor closed over her again .
although the woman had not spoken a single word to her , the nurse was very much frightened , but told no one about it .
next evening the same thing happened again , just as before , but as the woman was going away she said in a sad tone , ‘ two are gone , and one only is left ,’ and then disappeared as before .
the nurse was still more frightened when she heard the woman say this , and thought that perhaps some danger was hanging over the child , though she had no ill - opinion of the woman , who , indeed , had behaved towards the child as if it were her own .
the most mysterious thing was the woman saying ‘ and only one is left ;’ but the nurse guessed that this must mean that only one day was left , since she had come for two days already .
at last the nurse made up her mind to go to the king , and told him the whole story , and asked him to be present in person next day about the time when the woman usually came .
the king promised to do so , and came to the nurse ’ s room a little before the time , and sat down on a chair with his drawn sword in his hand .
soon after the planks in the floor sprang up as before , and the woman came up , dressed in white , with the iron belt and chain .
the king saw at once that it was his own queen , and immediately hewed asunder the iron chain that was fastened to the belt .
this was followed by such noises and crashings down in the earth that all the king ’ s palace shook , so that no one expected anything else than to see every bit of it shaken to pieces .
at last , however , the noises and shaking stopped , and they began to come to themselves again . the king and queen embraced each other , and she told him the whole story — how the witch came to the ship when they were all asleep and sent her off in the boat .
after she had gone so far that she could not see the ship , she sailed on through darkness until she landed beside a three - headed giant .
the giant wished her to marry him , but she refused ; whereupon he shut her up by herself , and told her she would never get free until she consented .
after a time she began to plan how to get her freedom , and at last told him that she would consent if he would allow her to visit her son on earth three days on end .
this he agreed to , but put on her this iron belt and chain , the other end of which he fastened round his own waist , and the great noises that were heard when the king cut the chain must have been caused by the giant ’ s falling down the underground passage when the chain gave way so suddenly .
the giant ’ s dwelling , indeed , was right under the palace , and the terrible shakings must have been caused by him in his death - throes . the king now understood how the queen he had had for some time past had been so ill - tempered .
he at once had a sack drawn over her head and made her be stoned to death , and after that torn in pieces by untamed horses .
the two young fellows also told now what they had heard and seen in the queen ’ s room , for before this they had been afraid to say anything about it , on account of the queen ’ s power . the real queen was now restored to all her dignity , and was beloved by all .
the nurse was married to a nobleman , and the king and queen gave her splendid presents .
