like many others in the world , there was a cobbler who had three daughters .
they were very poor .
he only earned enough just to feed his children .
he did not know what would become of him .
he went about in his grief , walking , walking sadly on , and he meets a gentleman , who asks him where he is going , melancholy like that .
he answers him ," even if i shall tell you , i shall get no relief .
"" yes , yes ; who knows ?
tell it ,"" i have three daughters , and i have not work enough to maintain them .
i have famine in the house .
"" if it is only that , we will manage it .
you will give me one of your daughters , and i will give you so much money .
" the father was very grieved to make any such bargain ; but at last he comes down to that .
he gives him his eldest daughter .
this gentleman takes her to his palace , and , after having passed some time there , he said to her that he has a short journey to make -- that he will leave her all the keys , that she might see everything , but that there is one key that she must not make use of -- that it would bring misfortune on her .
he locks the door on the young lady .
this young girl goes into all the rooms , and finds them very beautiful , and she was curious to see what there was in that which was forbidden .
she goes in , and sees heaps of dead bodies .
judge of her fright !
with her trembling she lets the key fall upon the ground .
she trembles for the coming of her husband .
he arrives , and asks her if she has entered the forbidden chamber .
she tells him " yes ."
he takes her and puts her into an underground dungeon ; hardly , hardly did he give her enough to eat ( to live on ), and that was human flesh . this cobbler had finished his money , and he was again melancholy .
the gentleman meets him again , and says to him ," your other daughter is not happy alone ; you must give me another daughter .
when she is happy , i will send her back ; and i will give you so much money .
" the father did not like it ; but he was so poor that , in order to have a little money , he gives him his daughter .
the gentleman takes her home with him , like the other .
after some days he said to her too ," i must take a short journey .
i will give you all the keys of the house , but do not touch such a key of such a room .
" he locks the house - door , and goes off , after having left her the food she needed .
this young girl goes into all the rooms , and , as she was curious , she went to look into the forbidden chamber .
she was so terribly frightened at the sight of so many dead bodies in this room , that she lets the key fall , and it gets stained .
our young girl was trembling as to what should become of her when the master should come back .
he arrives , and the first thing he asks --" have you been in that room ?
" she told him " yes ."
he takes her underground , like her other sister . this cobbler had finished his money , and he was in misery ; when the gentleman comes to him again , and says to him ," i will give you a great deal of money if you will let your daughter come to my house for a few days ; the three will be happier together , and i will send you the two back again together .
" the father believes it , and gives him his third daughter .
the gentleman gives him the money , and he takes this young girl , like the others .
at the end of some days he leaves her , saying that he is going to make a short journey .
he gives her all the keys of the house , saying to her --" you will go into all the rooms except this one ," pointing out the key to her .
he locks the outside door , and goes off .
this young girl goes straight , straight to the forbidden chamber ; she opens it , and think of her horror at seeing so many dead people .
she thought that he would kill her too , and , as there were all kinds of arms in this chamber , she takes a sabre with her , and hides it under her dress .
she goes a little further on , and sees her two sisters almost dying with hunger , and a young man in the same condition .
she takes care of them as well as she can till the gentleman comes home .
on his arrival , he asks her --" have you been in that room ?
" she says , " yes ;" and , in giving him back the keys , she lets them fall on the ground , on purpose , and at the instant that this gentleman stoops to pick them up , the young lady cuts off his head ( with her sword ).
oh , how glad she was !
quickly she runs to deliver her sisters and that young man , who was the son of a king .
she sends for her father , the cobbler , and leaves him there with his two daughters , and the youngest daughter goes away with her young gentleman , after being married to him .
if they lived well , they died well too . webster ' s comments on the tale : in another version , by estefanella hirigaray , we have the more ordinary tale of " blue beard "-- that of a widower who has killed twenty wives , and marries a twenty - first , who has two brothers .
she drops the key in the forbidden chamber , and is detected by the blood on it .
she manages to write to her brothers , and the dialogue by which she endeavours to gain time is rather spirited .
she is allowed to put oh her wedding - dress , etc ., to die in .
she goes to get ready , and she hears the cries of her husband , " are you ready ?"
" i am putting on my dress ."
he bawls out again , " are you ready ?"
" give me a moment more ."
" are you ready ?"
" i am fastening my dress ."
" are you ready yet ?"
" i am putting on my stockings ."
and she kept constantly looking out of window to see if her brothers were coming .
" are you ready ?"
" stop one moment ; i am putting on my shoes ."
" are you ready ?"
" i am brushing my hair ."
" are you ready ?"
" let me put on my wreath ."
and she sees her brothers coming on horseback in the forest , but a very long way off .
she hears again , " are you ready ?"
" i am coming in an instant ."
" you are coming ?"
" i ' ll come , if you do not come down ."
" don ' t come ; i will come down myself , without you ."
he seizes her on the stairs to kill her ; but the brothers rush in just in time to prevent her death , and they put him in prison .
