there once was a very beautiful woman who worked in an inn , and all the muleteers that passed by there were asked it they had ever seen a woman more beautiful than she .
she had a very handsome daughter , and she had her locked up so that nobody would see her .
one day a muleteer told her : " just now , i saw a more beautiful woman at the window combing her hair ."
" woe !
that was my daughter , i will have to have her killed .
" she asked two servants to kill her on a hill nearby , and there the daughter asked them not to kill her , but leave her behind , if she promised never to return home .
the servants took pity on her and left her behind .
the daughter walked until she came to a mountain one night and saw a house .
she asked if they would let her in but she did not see anybody .
she went inside and made herself some food , and when she had finished , she hid herself .
a group of thieves arrived that came from a robbery , and when they saw the food prepared , they said : " aye , i would like to know who made this dinner .
if there is someone here , show yourself !"
and the daughter came out of hiding and the poor thing explained her situation .
and the thieves said : " don ' t worry now , stay with us now , and we will look after you like a sister .
" after that , she always stayed when the thieves went on their robberies , and they liked her a lot and took good care of her . an old woman , who was always on errands across the country , passed by the house of her mother .
and the mother asked her : " you , who comes across so many countries , tell me , have you ever seen a face more beautiful than mine ?"
and the woman told her : " yes , i did see a woman in a gang that was even more beautiful than you ."
" when are you going there again ?
i want you to bring her some shoes ."
she gave the old woman a pair of shoes and told her : " take them to her , and tell her that it was her mother than sent them .
but make sure she puts them on before you leave , i want to be certain that she wears them .
i will pay you well ."
the woman took the shoes to the daughter , and when she got there she said : " here is a pair of shoes that your mother sent you ."
the daughter said : " i don ' t want any shoes ; my brothers give me all the shoes i need , and i don ' t want them ."
the old woman insisted so much that she took them anyway .
she put the first one on , and one of her eyes closed .
she put on the second , and she dropped dead .
when the thieves came back , they cried and cried at her feet , and were heartbroken over her death .
they said : " this beautiful face should not go under the ground yet .
we will put her in a coffin and bring her to that mountain where the son of the king comes to hunt , so that he can see this flower .
" they took her there , and the son of the king came and thought that she was very beautiful .
he took one of her shoes off , and she opened one eye .
he took the other shoe off , and she came alive again .
then he took her home and married her .
then they went to visit her mother , who even then tried to have her killed .
but she failed .
