once upon a time there was a king who had three sons and three daughters .
at length old age overtook him , and the hour came for him to die .
while dying he called to him his three sons and three daughters , and told his sons to let their sisters marry the very first men who came to ask them in marriage .
" do this or dread my curse ! "
said he , and soon after expired . some time after his death there came one night a great knocking at the gate ; the whole palace shook , and outside was heard a great noise of squeaking , singing , and shouting , whilst lightnings played round the whole court of the palace .
the people in the palace were very much frightened , so that they shook for fear , when all at once someone shouted from the outside , " o princes !
open the door !"
thereupon the king ' s eldest son said , " do not open !"
the second son added , " do not open , for anything in the world !"
but the youngest son said , " i will open the door !"
and he jumped up and opened it . the moment he had opened the door something came in , but the brother could see nothing except a bright light in one part of the room ; out of this light came these words : " i have come to demand your eldest sister for wife , and i shall take her away this moment , without any delay ; for i wait for nothing , neither will i come a second time to ask for her !
therefore answer me quickly - will you give her or not ?
" the eldest brother said , " i will not give her .
how can i give her when i cannot see you , and do not know who you are , nor whence you come ?
you come tonight for the first time , and wish to take her away instantly !
should i not know where i can visit my sister sometimes ?
" the second said , " i will not give my sister to - night to be taken away !
" but the youngest said , " i will give her if you will not .
have you forgotten what our father commanded us ?"
and , with these words , taking his sister by the hand , he gave her away , saying , " may she be to you a happy and honest wife !
" as the sister passed over the threshold everyone in the palace fell to the ground from fear , so vivid was the lightning and loud the claps of thunder .
the heavens seemed to be on fire and the whole sky rumbled , so that the whole palace shook as if about to fall .
all this however passed over , and soon after the day dawned ; when it grew light enough , the brothers went to see if any trace was left of the mighty power to whom they had given their sister , so that they might be able to trace the road by which it had gone .
there was , however , nothing which they could either see or hear . the second night , about the same time , there was heard again round the whole palace a great noise , as if an army was whistling and hissing , and at length someone at the door cried out , " open the door , o princes !"
they were afraid to disobey , and opened the door , and some dreadful power began to speak , " give here the girl , your second sister !
i am come to demand her !"
the eldest brother answered , " i will not give her away !"
the second brother said , " i will not give you my sister !"
but the youngest said , " i will give her !
have you forgotten what our father told us to do ?"
so he took his sister by the hand and gave her over , saying , " take her !
may she be honest and bring you happiness !"
then the unseen noises departed with the girl .
next day , as soon as it dawned , all three brothers walked round the palace , and for some distance beyond , looking everywhere for some trace where the power had gone , but nothing could be seen or heard . the third night , at the same hour as before , again the palace rocked from its very foundations , and there was a mighty uproar outside .
then a voice shouted , " open the door !"
the sons of the king arose and opened the door , and a great power passed by them and said , " i am come to demand your youngest sister !"
the eldest and the second son shouted , " no !
we will not give our sister this third night !
at any rate , we will know before our youngest sister goes away from our house to whom we are giving her , and where she is going , so that we can come to visit her whenever we wish to do so !"
thereupon the youngest brother said , " then i will give her ! have you forgotten what our father on his death - bed recommended us ?
it is not so very long ago !"
then he took the girl by the hand and said , " here she is !
take her !
and may she bring you happiness and be happy herself !"
then instantly the power went away with a great noise .
when the day dawned the brothers were very anxious about the fate of their sister , but could find no trace of the way in which she had gone . some time after the brothers , speaking together , said , " it is really very wonderful what has happened to our sisters !
we have no news - no trace of them !
we do not know where they are gone , nor whom they have married !"
at last they said to each other , " let us go and try to find our sisters !"
so they prepared immediately for their journey , took money for their travelling expenses , and went away in search of their three sisters . they had travelled some time when they lost their way in a forest , and wandered about a whole day .
when it grew dark they thought they would stop for the night at some place where they could find water .
so , having come to a lake , they decided to sleep near it , and sat down to take some supper .
when the time for sleep came the eldest brother said , " i will keep watch while you sleep !"
and so the two younger brothers went to sleep and the eldest watched .
in the middle of the night the lake began to be greatly agitated , and the brother who was watching grew quite frightened , especially when he saw something was coming towards him from the middle of the lake .
when it came near he saw that it was a terrific alligator with two ears , and it ran at him ; but he drew his knife and struck it , and cut off its head .
when he had done this he cut off the ears also , and put them in his pocket , the body and the head , however , he threw back into the lake .
meanwhile the day began to dawn , but the two brothers slept on and knew nothing of what their eldest brother had done .
at length he awakened them , but told them nothing , so they went on their travels together .
when the next day was closing , and it began again to grow dark , they took counsel with each other where they should rest for he night , and where they should find water .
they felt also afraid , because they were approaching some dangerous mountains . coming to a small lake they resolved to rest there that night ; and having made a fire they placed their things near it , and prepared to sleep .
then the second brother said , " this night i will keep guard whilst you sleep !"
so the two others fell asleep , and the second brother remained watching . all at once the lake began to move , and lo !
an alligator , with two heads , came running to swallow up the three .
but the brother who watched grasped his knife , felled the alligator to the ground with one blow , and cut off both the heads .
having done this he cut off the two pairs of ears , put them in his pocket , and threw the body into the water , and the two heads after it . the other brothers , however , knew nothing about the danger which they had escaped , and continued to sleep very soundly till the morning dawned . then the second brother awoke them , saying , " arise , my brothers !
it is day !"
and they instantly jumped up , and prepared to continue their journey .
but they knew not in what country they now were , and as they had eaten up nearly all their food , they feared greatly lest they should die of hunger in that unknown land .
so they prayed god to give them sight of some city or village or , at least , that they might meet someone to guide them , for they had already been wandering three days up and down in a wilderness , and could see no end to it .
pretty early in the morning they came to a large lake and resolved to go no further , but remain there all the day , and also to spend the night there .
" for if we go on ," said they , " we are not sure that we shall find any more water near which we can rest ."
so they remained there . when evening came they made a great fire , took their frugal supper , and prepared to sleep .
then the youngest brother said , " this night i will keep guard whilst you sleep "; and so the other two went to sleep , and the youngest brother kept awake , looking sharply about him , his eyes being turned often towards the lake .
part of the night had already passed , when suddenly the whole lake began to move ; the waves dashed over the fire and half quenched it .
then he drew his sword and placed himself near the fire , as there appeared a great alligator with three heads , which rushed upon the brothers as if about to swallow them all three . but the youngest brother had a brave heart , and would not awaken his brothers , so he met the alligator , and gave him three blows in succession , and at each blow he cut off one of the three heads .
then he cut off the six ears and put them in his pocket , and threw the body and the three heads into the lake .
whilst he was thus busy the fire had quite gone out , so he - having nothing there with which he could light the fire , and not wishing to awaken his brothers from their deep slumbers - stepped a little way into the forest , with the hope of seeing something with which he might rekindle the fire . there was , however , no trace of any fire anywhere .
at last , in his search , he climbed up a very high tree , and , having reached the top , looked about on all sides .
after much looking he thought he saw the glare of a fire not very far off .
so he came down from the tree and went in the direction in which he had seen the fire , in order to get some brand with which he might again light the fire .
he walked very far on this errand , and though the glare seemed always near him , it was a very long time before he reached it .
suddenly , however , he came upon a cave , and in the cave a great fire was burning .
round it sat nine giants , and two men were being roasted , one on each side of the fire .
besides that , there stood upon the fire a great kettle full of the limbs of men ready to be cooked .
when the king ' s son saw that , he was terrified and would gladly have gone back , but it was no longer possible . then he shouted as loud and cheerfully as he could , " good evening , my dear comrades !
i have been a very long time in search of you !
" they received him well , saying , " welcome !
if thou art of our company !
" he answered , " i shall remain yours for ever , and would give my life for your sake !"" eh !"
said they , " if you intend to be one of us , you know , you must also eat man ' s flesh , and go out with us in search of prey ?
" the king ' s son answered , " certainly ; i shall do everything that you do !
"" then come and sit with us !"
cried the giants ; and the whole company , sitting round the fire , took meat out of the kettle and began to eat .
the king ' s son pretended to eat , also , but instead of eating he always threw the meat behind him , and thus deceived them . when they had eaten up the whole of the roasted meat the giants got up and said , " let us now go to hunt , that we may have meat for to - morrow ."
so they went away , all nine of them , the king ' s son making the tenth .
" come along !"
they said to him , " there is a city near in which a great king lives .
we have been supplying ourselves with food from that city a great many years ."
as they came near the city they pulled two tall pine - trees up by the roots , and carried them along with them .
having come to the city wall , they reared one pine - tree up against it , and said to the king ' s son , " go up , now , to the top of the wall , so that we may be able to give you the other pine - tree , which you must take by the top and throw down into the city .
take care , however ," they said , " to keep the top of the tree in your hands , so that we can go down the stem of it into the city ."
thereupon the king ' s son climbed up on the wall and then cried out to them , " i don ' t know what to do ; i am not acquainted with this place , and i don ' t understand how to throw the tree over the wall ; please one of you come up and show me what i must do ."
then one of the giants climbed up the tree placed against the wall , caught the top of the other pine - tree , and threw it over the wall , keeping the top all the time safe in his hand .
whilst he was thus standing , the king ' s son drew his sword , struck him on the neck , and cut his head off , so that the giant fell down into the city . then he called to the other eight giants , " your brother is in the city ; come , one after the other , so that i can let you also down into the city !"
and the giants , not knowing what had happened to the first one , climbed up one after the other , and thus the king ' s son cut off their heads till he had killed all the nine . after that , he himself slowly descended the pine - tree and went into the city , walking through all the streets , but there was not one living creature to be seen .
the city seemed quite deserted .
then he said to himself , " surely those giants have made this great devastation and carried all the people away ". after walking about a very long time , he came to a tall tower , and , looking up , he saw a light in one of the rooms .
so he opened the door , and went up the steps , into the room .
and what a beautiful room it was in which he had entered !
it was decorated with gold and silk and velvet , and there was no one there except a girl lying on a couch sleeping .
as soon as the king ' s son entered , his eyes fell upon the girl , who was exceedingly beautiful .
just then he saw a large serpent coming down the wall , and it had stretched out its head and was ready to strike the girl on the forehead , between the eyes .
so he drew his dagger very quickly , and nailed the snake ' s head to the wall , exclaiming , " god grant that my dagger may not be taken out of the wall by any hand but my own !"
and thereupon he hurried away , and passed over the city wall , climbing up and going down the pine - trees .
when he got back to the cavern where the giants had been , he plucked a brand from the fire , and ran away very quickly to the spot where he had left his brothers , and found them still sleeping . he soon lighted the fire again , and meanwhile the sun having arisen he awoke his brothers , and they arose and all three continued their journey .
the same day they came to the road leading to the city .
in that city lived a mighty king , who used to walk about the streets every morning , weeping over the great destruction of his people by the giants .
the king feared greatly that one day his own daughter might also be eaten up by one of them .
that morning he rose very early , and went to look about the city ; the streets were all empty , because most of the people of the city had been eaten up by the giants .
walking about , at last he observed a tall pine - tree , pulled up quite by the roots , and leaning against the city wall .
he drew near , and saw a great wonder .
nine giants , the frightful enemies of his people , were lying there with their heads off .
when the king saw that he rejoiced exceedingly , and all the people who were left , gathered round and praised god , and prayed for good health and good luck to those who had killed the giants .
at that moment a servant came running , to tell the king that a serpent had very nearly killed his daughter .
so the king hurried back to the palace , and went quickly to the room wherein his daughter was , and there he saw the snake pinned to the wall , with a dagger through its head .
he tried to draw the knife out , but he was not able to do so . then the king sent a proclamation to all the corners of the kingdom , announcing that whoever had killed the nine giants and nailed the snake to the wall , should come to the king , who would make him great presents and give him his daughter for a wife .
this was proclaimed throughout the whole kingdom .
the king ordered , moreover , that large inns should be built on all the principal roads , and that every traveller who passed by should be asked if he had ever heard of the man who had killed the nine giants , and any traveller who knew anything about the matter should come and tell what he knew to the king , when he should be well rewarded . after some time the three brothers , travelling in search of their sisters , came one night to sleep at one of those inns .
after supper the master of the inn came in to speak to them , and , after boasting very much what great things he had himself done , he asked them if they themselves had ever done any great thing ? then the eldest brother began to speak , and said , " after i started with my brothers on this journey , one night we stopped to sleep by a lake in the midst of a great forest ; whilst my two brothers slept i watched , and , suddenly , an alligator came out of the lake to swallow us , but i took my knife and cut off its head ; if you don ' t believe me , see !
here are the two ears from his head !"
and he took the ears from his pocket and threw them on the table . when the second brother heard that , he said , " i kept guard the second night , and i killed an alligator with two heads ; if you do not believe me , look !
here are its four ears !"
and he took the ears out of his pocket and showed them . but the youngest brother kept silence .
the master of the inn began then to speak to him , saying , " well , my boy , your brothers are brave men ; let us hear if you have not done some bold deed ". then the youngest brother began , " i have also done something , though it may not be a great thing .
when we stayed to rest the third night in the great wilderness on the shore of the lake , my brothers lay down to sleep , for it was my turn to keep guard .
in the middle of the night the water stirred mightily , and a three - headed alligator came out and wished to swallow us , but i drew my sword and cut off all the three heads ; if you do not believe , see !
here are the six ears of the alligator !"
the brothers themselves were greatly surprised , and he continued : " meanwhile the fire had gone out , and i went in search of fire .
wandering about the mountain i met nine giants in one cave "; and so he went on , telling all that had happened and what he had done .
when the innkeeper heard that he hurried off and told everything to the king .
the king gave him plenty of money , and sent some of his men to bring the three brothers to him .
when they came to the king , he asked the youngest , " have you really done all these wonders in this city - killed the giants and saved my daughter from death ?"
" yes , your majesty ," answered the king ' s son .
then the king gave him his daughter to wife , and allowed him to take the first place after him in the kingdom .
after that he said to the two elder brothers , " if you like i will also find wives for you two and build palaces for you ."
but they thanked him , saying they were already married , and so told him how they had left home to search for their sisters .
when the king heard that , he kept by him only the youngest brother , his son - in - law , and gave the other two each a mule loaded with sacks full of money ; and so the two elder brothers went back to their kingdom .
all the time , however , the youngest brother was thinking of his three sisters , and many a time he wished to go in search of them again , though he was also sorry to leave his wife .
the king would never consent to his going , so the prince wasted away slowly without speaking about his grief . one day the king went out hunting , and said to his son - in - law , " remain here in the palace , and take these nine keys , and keep them carefully .
if you wish , however ," added he , " you can open three or four rooms , wherein you will see plenty of gold and silver , and other precious things .
indeed , if you much wish to do so , you can open eight of the rooms , but let nothing in the world tempt you to open the ninth .
if you open that , woe to you !
" the king went away , leaving his son - in - law in the palace , who immediately began to open one room after another , till he had opened the whole eight , and he saw in all masses of all sorts of precious things .
when he stood before the door of the ninth room , he said to himself , " i have passed luckily through all kinds of adventures , and now i must not dare to open this door !"
thereupon he opened it .
and what did he see ?
in the room was a man , whose legs were bound in iron up to the knees , and his arms to the elbows ; in the four corners of the chamber there were four columns , and from each an iron chain , and all the chains met in a ring round the man ' s neck .
so fast was he bound that he could not move at all any way .
in the front of him was a reservoir , and from it water was streaming through a golden pipe into a golden basin , just before him . near him stood , also , a golden mug , all covered with precious stones .
the man looked at the water and longed to drink , but he could not move to reach the cup .
when the king ' s son saw that , he was greatly surprised , and stepped back ; but the man cried , " come in , i conjure you in the name of the living god !"
then the prince again approached , and the man said , " do a good deed for the sake of the life hereafter .
give me a cup of water to drink , and be assured you will receive , as a recompense from me , another life ."
the king ' s son thought , " it is well , after all , to have two lives ," so he took the mug and filled it , and gave it to the man , who emptied it at once .
then the prince asked him , " now tell me , what is your name ?"
and the man answered , " my name is true steel ."
the king ' s son moved to go away , but the man begged again , " give me yet one cup of water , and i will give you in addition a second life ."
the prince said to himself , " one life is mine already , and he offers to give me another - that is , indeed , wonderful !"
so he took the mug and gave it to him , and the man drank it up .
the prince began already to fasten the door , while the man called to him , " oh , my brave one , come back a moment !
you have done two good deeds , do yet a third one and i will give you a third life .
take the mug , fill it with water , and pour the water on my head , and for that i will give you a third life ."
when the king ' s son heard that , he turned , filled the beaker with water , and poured it over the man ' s head .
the moment the water met his head all the fastenings around the man ' s neck broke , all the iron chains burst asunder .
true steel jumped up like lightning , spread his wings , and started to fly , taking with him the king ' s daughter , the wife of his deliverer , with whom he disappeared .
what was to be done now ?
the prince was afraid of the king ' s anger . when the king returned from the chase , his son - in - law told him all that had happened , and the king was very sorry and said to him , " why did you do this ?
i told you not to open the ninth room !"
the king ' s son answered , " don ' t be angry with me !
i will go and find true steel and bring my wife back !"
then the king attempted to persuade him not to go away : " do not go , for anything in the world !"
he said ; " you do not know true steel .
it cost me very many soldiers and much money to catch him !
better remain here , and i will find you some other maiden for a wife ; do not fear , for i love you as my own son , notwithstanding all that has happened !"
the prince , however , would not hear of remaining there , so taking some money for his journey he saddled and bridled his horse , and started on his travels in search of true steel . after travelling a long time , he one day entered a strange city , and , as he was looking about , a girl called to him from a kiosk , " o son of the king , dismount from your horse and come into the forecourt ."
when he entered the courtyard the girl met him , and on looking at her he recognised his eldest sister .
they greeted each other , and the sister said to him , " come , my brother - come with me into the kiosk ". when they came into the kiosk , he asked her who her husband was , and she answered , " i am married to the king of dragons , who is also a dragon .
i must hide you well , my dear brother , for my husband has often said that he would kill his brothers - in - law if he could only meet them .
i will try him first , and if he will promise not to injure you , i will tell him you are here ."
so she hid her brother and his horse as well as she could .
at night , supper was prepared in readiness for her husband , and at last he came .
when he came flying into the courtyard , the whole palace shone .
the moment he came in , he called his wife and said , " wife , there is a smell of human bones here !
tell me directly what it is !
"" there is no one here !"
said she .
but he exclaimed , " that is not true !
" then his wife said , " my dear , will you answer me truly what i am going to ask you ?
would you do any harm to my brothers , if one of them came here to see me ?"
and the dragon answered , " your eldest and your second brother i would kill and roast , but i would do no harm to the youngest ."
then his wife said , " well , then , i will tell you that my youngest brother , and your brother - in - law , is here ."
when the dragon king heard that he said , " let him come to me !
" so the sister led the brother before the king , her husband , and he embraced him .
they kissed each other , and the king exclaimed : " welcome , brother - in - law !"
" i hope i find you well ?"
returned the prince courteously , and he told the dragon king all his adventures from the beginning to the end . then the dragon king cried out , " and where are you going , my poor fellow ?
the day before yesterday true steel passed here carrying away your wife .
i assailed him with seven thousand dragons , yet could do him no harm .
leave the devil in peace ; i will give you as much money as you like and then you may go home quietly ."
but the king ' s son would not hear of going back , and proposed next morning to continue his journey .
when the dragon king saw that he could not change his intention , he took one of his feathers , and gave it into his hand , saying , " remember what i now say to you .
here you have one of my feathers , and if you find true steel and are greatly pressed , burn this feather , and i will come in an instant to your help with all my forces ."
the king ' s son took the feather and continued his journey . after long travelling about the world he arrived at a great city , and , as he rode through the streets , a girl called to him from a kiosk : " here , son of the king !
dismount and come into the courtyard !"
the prince led his horse into the yard , and behold !
the second sister came to meet him .
they embraced and kissed each other , and the sister led the brother up into the kiosk , and had his horse taken to a stable .
when they were in the kiosk , the sister asked her brother how he came there , and he told her all his adventures .
he then asked her who her husband was .
" i am married to the king of the falcons ," she said , " and he will come home to - night , so i must hide you somewhere , for he often threatens my brothers ". shortly after she had concealed her brother , the falcon king came home .
as soon as he alighted all the house shook .
immediately his supper was set before him , but he said to his wife , " there are human bones somewhere !"
the wife answered , " no , my husband , there is nothing ."
after long talking , however , she asked him , " would you harm my brothers if they came to see me ?"
the falcon king answered , " the eldest brother and the second i would delight in torturing , but to the youngest i would do no harm ."
so she told him about her brother .
then he ordered that they should bring him immediately ; and when he saw him he rose up and they embraced and kissed each other .
" welcome , brother - in - law !"
said the king of falcons .
" i hope you are happy , brother ?"
returned the prince , and then they sat down to sup together .
after supper , the falcon king asked his brother - in - law where he was travelling .
he replied that he was going in search of true steel , and told the king all that had happened . on hearing this the falcon king began to advise him to go no farther .
" it is no use going on ," said he .
" i will tell you something of true steel .
the day he stole your wife , i assaulted him with four thousand falcons .
we had a terrible battle with him , blood was shed till it reached the knees , but yet we could do him no harm !
do you think now that you alone could do anything with him ?
i advise you to return home .
here is my treasure : take with you as much as you like ."
but the king ' s son answered , " i thank you for all your kindness , but i cannot return .
i shall go at all events in search of true steel !"
for he thought to himself , " why should i not go , seeing i have three lives ?"
when the falcon king saw that he could not persuade him to go back , he took a little feather and gave it him , saying , " take this feather , and when you find yourself in great need , burn it and i will instantly come with all my powers to help you !"
so the king ' s son took the feather and continued his journey , hoping to find true steel . after travelling for a long time about the world he came to a third city .
as he entered , a girl called to him from a kiosk , " dismount , and come into the courtyard ."
the king ' s son went into the yard , and was surprised to find his youngest sister , who came to meet him .
when they had embraced and kissed each other , the sister led her brother to the kiosk and sent his horse to the stables .
the brother asked her , " dear sister , whom have you married ?
what is your husband ?"
she answered , " my husband is the king of eagles ". when the eagle king returned home in the evening his wife received him , but he exclaimed immediately , " what man has come into my palace ?
tell me the truth instantly !"
she answered , " no one is here "; and they began their supper .
by - and - by the wife said , " tell me truly : would you do any harm to my brothers if they came here ?"
the eagle king answered , " the eldest and second brother i would kill , but to the youngest i would do no harm !
i would help him whenever i could !"
then the wife said , " my youngest brother , and your brother - in - law , is here ; he came to see me ."
the eagle king ordered that they should bring the prince instantly , received him standing , kissed him , and said , " welcome , brother - in - law !"
and the king ' s son answered , " i hope you are well ?"
they then sat down to their supper .
during the repast they conversed about many things , and at last the prince told the king he was travelling in search of true steel .
when the eagle king heard that , he tried to dissuade him from going on , adding , " leave the devil in peace , my brother - in - law ; give up that journey and stay with me !
i will do everything to satisfy you !"
the king ' s son , however , would not hear of remaining , but next day , as soon as it was dawn , prepared to set out in search of true steel .
then the eagle king , seeing that he could not persuade him to give up his journey , plucked out one of his feathers and gave it him , saying , " if you find yourself in great danger , my brother , make a fire and burn this feather ; i will then come to your help immediately with all my eagles ."
so the prince took the feather and went away . after travelling for a very long time about the world , roaming from one city to another , and always going farther and farther from his home , he found his wife in a cavern . when the wife saw him she was greatly astonished , and cried , " in god ' s name , my husband , how did you come here ? '
he told her how it all happened , and then added , " now let us fly !"
" how can we fly ," she asked , " when true steel will reach us instantly ?
and when he does he will kill you , and carry me back ."
but the prince , knowing he had three other lives to live , persuaded his wife to flee , and so they did .
as soon , however , as they started , true steel heard it , and followed immediately .
when he reached them , he shouted to the king ' s son , " so , prince , you have stolen your wife !"
then , after taking the wife back , he added , " now , i forgive you this life , because i recollect that i promised to give you three lives ; but go away directly , and never come here again after your wife , else you will be lost !"
thus saying , he carried the wife away , and the prince remained alone on the spot , not knowing what to do . at length the prince resolved to go back to his wife .
when he came near the cave he found an opportunity when true steel was absent , and took his wife again and tried to escape with her . but true steel learned their flight directly , and ran after them .
when he reached them , he fixed an arrow to his bow , and cried to the king ' s son , " do you prefer to die by the arrow or by the sword ?"
the king ' s son asked pardon , and true steel said , " i pardon you also the second life ; but i warn you !
never come here again after your wife , for i will not pardon you any more !
i shall kill you on the spot !"
saying that , he carried the wife back to the cave , and the prince remained , thinking all the time how he could save her . at last he said to himself , " why should i fear true steel , when i have yet two lives ?
one of which he has made me a present , and one which is my own ?"
so he decided to return again to the cave next morning , when true steel was absent .
he saw his wife , and said to her , " let us fly !"
she objected , saying , " it is of no use to fly , when true steel would certainly overtake us ."
however , her husband forced her to go with him , and they went away .
true steel , however , overtook them quickly , and shouted , " wait a bit !
this time i will not pardon you !"
the prince became afraid , and begged him to pardon him also this time , and true steel said to him , " you know i promised to give you three lives , so now i give you this one , but it is the third and last ."
now you have only one life , so go home , and do not risk losing the one life god gave you !
" then the prince , seeing he could do nothing against this great power , turned back , reflecting , however , all the time , as to the best way of getting his wife back from true steel . at last , he remembered what his brothers - in - law had said to him when they gave him their feathers .
then he said to himself , " i will try this fourth time to get my wife back ; if i come to trouble , i will burn the feathers , and see if my brothers - in - law will come to help me ". hereupon he went back once more towards the cavern wherein his wife was kept , and , as he saw from a distance that true steel was just leaving the cave , he went near and showed himself to his wife .
she was surprised and terrified , and exclaimed , " are you so tired of your life that you come back again to me ?"
then he told her about his brothers - in - law , and how each of them had given him one of their feathers , and had promised to come to help him whenever he needed their assistance .
" therefore ," added he , " i am come once more to take you away ; let us start at once ". this they did .
the same moment , however , true steel heard of it , and shouted from afar , " stop , prince !
you cannot run away !"
and then the king ' s son , seeing true steel so near him , quickly took out a flint and tinder - box , struck some sparks , and burned all three feathers .
whilst he was doing this , however , true steel reached him , and , with his sword , cut the prince in two parts .
that moment came the king of dragons , rushing with his whole army of dragons , the king of falcons , with all his falcons , and the king of eagles , with his mighty host of eagles , and they all attacked true steel .
torrents of blood were shed , but after all true steel caught up the woman and fled away . then the three kings gave all their attention to their brother - in - law , and determined to bring him back to life .
thereupon they asked three of the most active dragons which of them could bring them , in the shortest time , some water from the river jordan . one said , " i could bring it in half an hour ."
the second said , " i can go and return in ten minutes ."
the third dragon said , " i can bring it in nine seconds ."
then the three kings said to the last one , " go , dragon ; and make haste !"
then this dragon exhibited all his fiery might , and in nine seconds , as he had promised , he came back with water from the jordan . the kings took the water and poured it on the places where the prince was wounded , and , as they did so , the wound closed up , the body joined together , and the king ' s son sprang up alive . then the three kings counselled him : " now that you are saved from death , go home !"
but the prince answered , he would at all events yet once more try to get his wife back .
the kings , his brothers - in - law , again spoke , " do not try again !
indeed , you will be lost if you go , for now you have only one life which god gave you !
" the king ' s son , however , would not listen to their advice .
so the kings told him , " well , then , if you are still determined to go , at least do not take your wife away immediately , but tell her to ask true steel where his strength lies , and then come and tell us , in order that we may help you to conquer him !
" so the prince went secretly and saw his wife , and told her how she could persuade true steel to tell her where his strength was .
he then left her and went away . when true steel came home , the wife of the king ' s son asked him , " tell me , now , where is your great strength ?"
he answered , " my wife , my strength is in my sword !"
then she began to pray , and turned to his sword .
when true steel saw that , he burst out laughing , and said , " o foolish woman !
my strength is not in my sword , but in my bow and arrows !"
then she turned towards the bow and arrows and prayed . then true steel said , " i see , my wife , you have a clever teacher who has taught you to find out where my strength lies !
i could almost say that your husband is living , and it is he who teaches you !
" but she assured him that no one taught her , for she had no longer anyone to do so . after some days her husband came , and when she told him she could not learn anything from true steel , he said , " try again !"
and went away . when true steel came home she began again to ask him the secret of his strength .
then he answered her , " since you think so much of my strength , i will tell you truly where it is ."
and he continued , " far away from this place there is a very high mountain ; in the mountain there is a fox ; in the fox there is a heart ; in the heart there is a bird , and in this bird is my strength .
it is no easy task , however , to catch that fox , for she can transform herself into a multitude of creatures ". next day , as soon as true steel left the cave , the king ' s son came to his wife , and she told him all she had learned .
then the prince hurried away to his brothers - in - law , who waited , all three impatient to see him , and to hear where was the strength of true steel .
when they heard , all three went away at once with the prince to find the mountain .
having got there , they set the eagles to chase the fox , but the fox ran to a lake , which was in the midst of the mountain , and changed herself into a six - winged golden bird .
then the falcons pursued her , and drove her out of the lake , and she flew into the clouds , but there the dragons hurried after her .
so she changed herself again into a fox , and began to run along the earth , but the rest of the eagles stopped her , surrounded , and caught her . the three kings then ordered the fox to be killed , and her heart to be taken out .
a great fire was made and the bird was taken out of the heart and burnt .
that very moment true steel fell down dead , and the prince took his wife and returned home with her .
