there were once on a time a king and a queen who lived happily together and had twelve children , but they were all boys .
then said the king to his wife , " if the thirteenth child which thou art about to bring into the world , is a girl , the twelve boys shall die , in order that her possessions may be great , and that the kingdom may fall to her alone ."
he caused likewise twelve coffins to be made , which were already filled with shavings , and in each lay the little pillow for the dead , and he had them taken into a locked - up room , and then he gave the queen the key of it , and bade her not to speak of this to any one . the mother , however , now sat and lamented all day long , until the youngest son , who was always with her , and whom she had named benjamin , from the bible , said to her , " dear mother , why art thou so sad ?
"" dearest child ," she answered , " i may not tell thee ."
but he let her have no rest until she went and unlocked the room , and showed him the twelve coffins ready filled with shavings .
then she said , my dearest benjamin , thy father has had these coffins made for thee and for thy eleven brothers , for if i bring a little girl into the world , you are all to be killed and buried in them ."
and as she wept while she was saying this , the son comforted her and said , " weep not , dear mother , we will save ourselves , and go hence ."
but she said , " go forth into the forest with thy eleven brothers , and let one sit constantly on the highest tree which can be found , and keep watch , looking towards the tower here in the castle .
if i give birth to a little son , i will put up a white flag , and then you may venture to come back , but if i bear a daughter , i will hoist a red flag , and then fly hence as quickly as you are able , and may the good god protect you .
and every night i will rise up and pray for you -- in winter that you may be able to warm yourself at a fire , and in summer that you may not faint away in the heat .
" after she had blessed her sons therefore , they went forth into the forest .
they each kept watch in turn , and sat on the highest oak and looked towards the tower .
when eleven days had passed and the turn came to benjamin , he saw that a flag was being raised .
it was , however , not the white , but the blood - red flag which announced that they were all to die .
when the brothers heard that , they were very angry and said , " are we all to suffer death for the sake of a girl ?
we swear that we will avenge ourselves !-- wheresoever we find a girl , her red blood shall flow .
" thereupon they went deeper into the forest , and in the midst of it , where it was the darkest , they found a little bewitched hut , which was standing empty .
then said they , " here we will dwell , and thou benjamin , who art the youngest and weakest , thou shalt stay at home and keep house , we others will go out and get food ."
then they went into the forest and shot hares , wild deer , birds and pigeons , and whatsoever there was to eat ; this they took to benjamin , who had to dress it for them in order that they might appease their hunger .
they lived together ten years in the little hut , and the time did not appear long to them . the little daughter which their mother the queen had given birth to , was now grown up ; she was good of heart , and fair of face , and had a golden star on her forehead .
once , when it was the great washing , she saw twelve men ' s shirts among the things , and asked her mother , " to whom do these twelve shirts belong , for they are far too small for father ?"
then the queen answered with a heavy heart , " dear child , these belong to thy twelve brothers ."
said the maiden , " where are my twelve brothers , i have never yet heard of them ?"
she replied , " god knows where they are , they are wandering about the world ."
then she took the maiden and opened the chamber for her , and showed her the twelve coffins with the shavings , and pillows for the head .
" these coffins ," said she , " were destined for thy brothers , but they went away secretly before thou wert born ," and she related to her how everything had happened ; then said the maiden , " dear mother , weep not , i will go and seek my brothers .
" so she took the twelve shirts and went forth , and straight into the great forest .
she walked the whole day , and in the evening she came to the bewitched hut .
then she entered it and found a young boy , who asked , " from whence comest thou , and whither art thou bound ?"
and was astonished that she was so beautiful , and wore royal garments , and had a star on her forehead .
and she answered , " i am a king ' s daughter , and am seeking my twelve brothers , and i will walk as far as the sky is blue until i find them ."
she likewise showed him the twelve shirts which belonged to them .
then benjamin saw that she was his sister , and said , " i am benjamin , thy youngest brother ."
and she began to weep for joy , and benjamin wept also , and they kissed and embraced each other with the greatest love .
but after this he said , " dear sister , there is still one difficulty .
we have agreed that every maiden whom we meet shall die , because we have been obliged to leave our kingdom on account of a girl ."
then said she , " i will willingly die , if by so doing i can deliver my twelve brothers .
"" no ," answered he , " thou shalt not die , seat thyself beneath this tub until our eleven brothers come , and then i will soon come to an agreement with them .
" she did so , and when it was night the others came from hunting , and their dinner was ready .
and as they were sitting at table , and eating , they asked , " what news is there ?"
said benjamin , " don ' t you know anything ?"
- " no ," they answered .
he continued , " you have been in the forest and i have stayed at home , and yet i know more than you do ."
- " tell us then ," they cried .
he answered , " but promise me that the first maiden who meets us shall not be killed ."
- " yes ," they all cried , " she shall have mercy , only do tell us .
" then said he , " our sister is here ," and he lifted up the tub , and the king ' s daughter came forth in her royal garments with the golden star on her forehead , and she was beautiful , delicate and fair .
then they were all rejoiced , and fell on her neck , and kissed and loved her with all their hearts . now she stayed at home with benjamin and helped him with the work .
the eleven went into the forest and caught game , and deer , and birds , and wood - pigeons that they might have food , and the little sister and benjamin took care to make it ready for them .
she sought for the wood for cooking and herbs for vegetables , and put the pans on the fire so that the dinner was always ready when the eleven came .
she likewise kept order in the little house , and put beautifully white clean coverings on the little beds , and the brothers were always contented and lived in great harmony with her . once on a time the two at home had prepared a beautiful entertainment , and when they were all together , they sat down and ate and drank and were full of gladness .
there was , however , a little garden belonging to the bewitched house wherein stood twelve lily flowers , which are likewise called students .
she wished to give her brothers pleasure , and plucked the twelve flowers , and thought she would present each brother with one while at dinner .
but at the self - same moment that she plucked the flowers the twelve brothers were changed into twelve ravens , and flew away over the forest , and the house and garden vanished likewise .
and now the poor maiden was alone in the wild forest , and when she looked around , an old woman was standing near her who said , " my child , what hast thou done ?
why didst thou not leave the twelve white flowers growing ?
they were thy brothers , who are now for evermore changed into ravens ."
the maiden said , weeping , " is there no way of delivering them ?
"" no ," said the woman , " there is but one in the whole world , and that is so hard that thou wilt not deliver them by it , for thou must be dumb for seven years , and mayst not speak or laugh , and if thou speakest one single word , and only an hour of the seven years is wanting , all is in vain , and thy brothers will be killed by the one word .
" then said the maiden in her heart , " i know with certainty that i shall set my brothers free ," and went and sought a high tree and seated herself in it and span , and neither spoke nor laughed .
now it so happened that a king was hunting in the forest , who had a great greyhound which ran to the tree on which the maiden was sitting , and sprang about it , whining , and barking at her .
then the king came by and saw the beautiful king ' s daughter with the golden star on her brow , and was so charmed with her beauty that he called to ask her if she would be his wife .
she made no answer , but nodded a little with her head .
so he climbed up the tree himself , carried her down , placed her on his horse , and bore her home .
then the wedding was solemnized with great magnificence and rejoicing , but the bride neither spoke nor smiled .
when they had lived happily together for a few years , the king ' s mother , who was a wicked woman , began to slander the young queen , and said to the king , " this is a common beggar girl whom thou hast brought back with thee .
who knows what impious tricks she practises secretly !
even if she be dumb , and not able to speak , she still might laugh for once ; but those who do not laugh have bad consciences ."
at first the king would not believe it , but the old woman urged this so long , and accused her of so many evil things , that at last the king let himself be persuaded and sentenced her to death . and now a great fire was lighted in the courtyard in which she was to be burnt , and the king stood above at the window and looked on with tearful eyes , because he still loved her so much .
and when she was bound fast to the stake , and the fire was licking at her clothes with its red tongue , the last instant of the seven years expired .
then a whirring sound was heard in the air , and twelve ravens came flying towards the place , and sank downwards , and when they touched the earth they were her twelve brothers , whom she had delivered .
they tore the fire asunder , extinguished the flames , set their dear sister free , and kissed and embraced her .
and now as she dared to open her mouth and speak , she told the king why she had been dumb , and had never laughed .
the king rejoiced when he heard that she was innocent , and they all lived in great unity until their death .
the wicked step - mother was taken before the judge , and put into a barrel filled with boiling oil and venomous snakes , and died an evil death .
