once on a time a countryman had a son who was as big as a thumb , and did not become any bigger , and during several years did not grow one hair ' s breadth .
once when the father was going out to plough , the little one said , " father , i will go out with you ."
- " thou wouldst go out with me ?"
said the father .
" stay here , thou wilt be of no use out there , besides thou mightest get lost !"
then thumbling began to cry , and for the sake of peace his father put him in his pocket , and took him with him .
when he was outside in the field , he took him out again , and set him in a freshly - cut furrow .
whilst he was there , a great giant came over the hill .
" do thou see that great bogie ?"
said the father , for he wanted to frighten the little fellow to make him good ; " he is coming to fetch thee ."
the giant , however , had scarcely taken two steps with his long legs before he was in the furrow .
he took up little thumbling carefully with two fingers , examined him , and without saying one word went away with him .
his father stood by , but could not utter a sound for terror , and he thought nothing else but that his child was lost , and that as long as he lived he should never set eyes on him again . the giant , however , carried him home , suckled him , and thumbling grew and became tall and strong after the manner of giants .
when two years had passed , the old giant took him into the forest , wanted to try him , and said , " pull up a stick for thyself ."
then the boy was already so strong that he tore up a young tree out of the earth by the roots .
but the giant thought , " we must do better than that ," took him back again , and suckled him two years longer .
when he tried him , his strength had increased so much that he could tear an old tree out of the ground .
that was still not enough for the giant ; he again suckled him for two years , and when he then went with him into the forest and said , " now just tear up a proper stick for me ," the boy tore up the strongest oak - tree from the earth , so that it split , and that was a mere trifle to him .
" now that will do ," said the giant , " thou art perfect ," and took him back to the field from whence he had brought him .
his father was there following the plough .
the young giant went up to him , and said , " does my father see what a fine man his son has grown into ?
" the farmer was alarmed , and said , " no , thou art not my son ; i don ' t want thee leave me !"
- " truly i am your son ; allow me to do your work , i can plough as well as you , nay better ."
- " no , no , thou art not my son ; and thou canst not plough go away !"
however , as he was afraid of this great man , he left go of the plough , stepped back and stood at one side of the piece of land .
then the youth took the plough , and just pressed it with one hand , but his grasp was so strong that the plough went deep into the earth .
the farmer could not bear to see that , and called to him , " if thou art determined to plough , thou must not press so hard on it , that makes bad work ."
the youth , however , unharnessed the horses , and drew the plough himself , saying , " just go home , father , and bid my mother make ready a large dish of food , and in the meantime i will go over the field ."
then the farmer went home , and ordered his wife to prepare the food ; but the youth ploughed the field which was two acres large , quite alone , and then he harnessed himself to the harrow , and harrowed the whole of the land , using two harrows at once .
when he had done it , he went into the forest , and pulled up two oak - trees , laid them across his shoulders , and hung on them one harrow behind and one before , and also one horse behind and one before , and carried all as if it had been a bundle of straw , to his parents ' house .
when he entered the yard , his mother did not recognize him , and asked , " who is that horrible tall man ?"
the farmer said , " that is our son ."
she said , " no that cannot be our son , we never had such a tall one , ours was a little thing ."
she called to him , " go away , we do not want thee !"
the youth was silent , but led his horses to the stable , gave them some oats and hay , and all that they wanted .
when he had done this , he went into the parlour , sat down on the bench and said , " mother , now i should like something to eat , will it soon be ready ?"
then she said , " yes ," and brought in two immense dishes full of food , which would have been enough to satisfy herself and her husband for a week .
the youth , however , ate the whole of it himself , and asked if she had nothing more to set before him .
" no ," she replied , " that is all we have ."
- " but that was only a taste , i must have more ."
she did not dare to oppose him , and went and put a huge caldron full of food on the fire , and when it was ready , carried it in .
" at length come a few crumbs ," said he , and ate all there was , but it was still not sufficient to appease his hunger .
then said he , " father , i see well that with you i shall never have food enough ; if you will get me an iron staff which is strong , and which i cannot break against my knees , i will go out into the world ."
the farmer was glad , put his two horses in his cart , and fetched from the smith a staff so large and thick , that the two horses could only just bring it away .
the youth laid it across his knees , and snap !
he broke it in two in the middle like a bean - stalk , and threw it away .
the father then harnessed four horses , and brought a bar which was so long and thick , that the four horses could only just drag it .
the son snapped this also in twain against his knees , threw it away , and said , " father , this can be of no use to me , you must harness more horses , and bring a stronger staff ."
so the father harnessed eight horses , and brought one which was so long and thick , that the eight horses could only just carry it .
when the son took it in his hand , he broke off a bit from the top of it also , and said , " father , i see that you will not be able to procure me any such staff as i want , i will remain no longer with you .
" so he went away , and gave out that he was a smith ' s apprentice .
he arrived at a village , wherein lived a smith who was a greedy fellow , who never did a kindness to any one , but wanted everything for himself .
the youth went into the smithy and asked if he needed a journeyman .
" yes ," said the smith , and looked at him , and thought , " that is a strong fellow who will strike out well , and earn his bread ."
so he asked , " how much wages dost thou want ?"
- " i don ' t want any at all ," he replied , " only every fortnight , when the other journeymen are paid , i will give thee two blows , and thou must bear them ."
the miser was heartily satisfied , and thought he would thus save much money .
next morning , the strange journeyman was to begin to work , but when the master brought the glowing bar , and the youth struck his first blow , the iron flew asunder , and the anvil sank so deep into the earth , that there was no bringing it out again .
then the miser grew angry , and said , " oh , but i can ' t make any use of you , you strike far too powerfully ; what will you have for the one blow ?
" then said he , " i will only give you quite a small blow , that ' s all ."
and he raised his foot , and gave him such a kick that he flew away over four loads of hay .
then he sought out the thickest iron bar in the smithy for himself , took it as a stick in his hand and went onwards . when he had walked for some time , he came to a small farm , and asked the bailiff if he did not require a head - servant .
" yes ," said the bailiff , " i can make use of one ; you look a strong fellow who can do something , how much a year do you want as wages ?"
he again replied that he wanted no wages at all , but that every year he would give him three blows , which he must bear .
then the bailiff was satisfied , for he , too , was a covetous fellow .
next morning all the servants were to go into the wood , and the others were already up , but the head - servant was still in bed .
then one of them called to him , " get up , it is time ; we are going into the wood , and thou must go with us ."
- " ah ," said he quite roughly and surlily , " you may just go , then ; i shall be back again before any of you ."
then the others went to the bailiff , and told him that the head - man was still lying in bed , and would not go into the wood with them .
the bailiff said they were to awaken him again , and tell him to harness the horses .
the head - man , however , said as before , " just go there , i shall be back again before any of you ."
and then he stayed in bed two hours longer .
at length he arose from the feathers , but first he got himself two bushels of peas from the loft , made himself some broth with them , ate it at his leisure , and when that was done , went and harnessed the horses , and drove into the wood .
not far from the wood was a ravine through which he had to pass , so he first drove the horses on , and then stopped them , and went behind the cart , took trees and brushwood , and made a great barricade , so that no horse could get through .
when he was entering the wood , the others were just driving out of it with their loaded carts to go home ; then said he to them , " drive on , i will still get home before you do ."
he did not drive far into the wood , but at once tore two of the very largest trees of all out of the earth , threw them on his cart , and turned round .
when he came to the barricade , the others were still standing there , not able to get through .
" don ' t you see ," said he , " that if you had stayed with me , you would have got home just as quickly , and would have had another hour ' s sleep ?"
he now wanted to drive on , but his horeses could not work their way through , so he unharnessed them , laid them on the top of the cart , took the shafts in his own hands , and pulled it all through , and he did this just as easily as if it had been laden with feathers .
when he was over , he said to the others , " there , you see , i have got over quicker than you ," and drove on , and the others had to stay where they were .
in the yard , however , he took a tree in his hand , showed it to the bailiff , and said , " isn ' t that a fine bundle of wood ?"
then said the bailiff to his wife , " the servant is a good one , if he does sleep long , he is still home before the others ."
so he served the bailiff for a year , and when that was over , and the other servants were getting their wages , he said it was time for him to take his too .
the bailiff , however , was afraid of the blows which he was to receive , and earnestly entreated him to excuse him from having them ; for rather than that , he himself would be head - servant , and the youth should be bailiff .
" no ," said he , " i will not be a bailiff , i am head - servant , and will remain so , but i will administer that which we agreed on ."
the bailiff was willing to give him whatsoever he demanded , but it was of no use , the head - servant said no to everything .
then the bailiff did not know what to do , and begged for a fortnight ' s delay , for he wanted to find some way of escape .
the head - servant consented to this delay .
the bailiff summoned all his clerks together , and they were to think the matter over , and give him advice .
the clerks pondered for a long time , but at last they said that no one was sure of his life with the head - servant , for he could kill a man as easily as a midge , and that the bailiff ought to make him get into the well and clean it , and when he was down below , they would roll up one of the mill - stones which was lying there , and throw it on his head ; and then he would never return to daylight .
the advice pleased the bailiff , and the head - servant was quite willing to go down the well .
when he was standing down below at the bottom , they rolled down the largest mill - stone and thought they had broken his skull , but he cried , " chase away those hens from the well , they are scratching in the sand up there , and throwing the grains into my eyes , so that i can ' t see ."
so the bailiff cried , " sh - sh ," and pretended to frighten the hens away .
when the head - servant had finished his work , he climbed up and said , " just look what a beautiful neck - tie i have on ," and behold it was the mill - stone which he was wearing round his neck .
the head - servant now wanted to take his reward , but the bailiff again begged for a fortnight ' s delay .
the clerks met together and advised him to send the head - servant to the haunted mill to grind corn by night , for from thence as yet no man had ever returned in the morning alive .
the proposal pleased the bailiff , he called the head - servant that very evening , and ordered him to take eight bushels of corn to the mill , and grind it that night , for it was wanted .
so the head - servant went to the loft , and put two bushels in his right pocket , and two in his left , and took four in a wallet , half on his back , and half on his breast , and thus laden went to the haunted mill .
the miller told him that he could grind there very well by day , but not by night , for the mill was haunted , and that up to the present time whosoever had gone into it at night had been found in the morning lying dead inside .
he said , " i will manage it , just you go away to bed ."
then he went into the mill , and poured out the corn .
about eleven o ' clock he went into the miller ' s room , and sat down on the bench .
when he had sat there a while , a door suddenly opened , and a large table came in , and on the table , wine and roasted meats placed themselves , and much good food besides , but everything came of itself , for no one was there to carry it .
after this the chairs pushed themselves up , but no people came , until all at once he beheld fingers , which handled knives and forks , and laid food on the plates , but with this exception he saw nothing .
as he was hungry , and saw the food , he , too , place himself at the table , ate with those who were eating and enjoyed it .
when he had had enough , and the others also had quite emptied their dishes , he distinctly heard all the candles being suddenly snuffed out , and as it was now pitch dark , he felt something like a box on the ear .
then he said , " if anything of that kind comes again , i shall strike out in return ."
and when he had received a second box on the ear , he , too struck out .
and so it continued the whole night .
he took nothing without returning it , but repaid everything with interest , and did not lay about him in vain .
at daybreak , however , everything ceased .
when the miller had got up , he wanted to look after him , and wondered if he were still alive .
then the youth said , " i have eaten my fill , have received some boxes on the ears , but i have given some in return ."
the miller rejoiced , and said that the mill was now released from the spell , and wanted to give him much money as a reward .
but he said , " money , i will not have , i have enough of it ."
so he took his meal on his back , went home , and told the bailiff that he had done what he had been told to do , and would now have the reward agreed on .
when the bailiff heard that , he was seriously alarmed and quite beside himself ; he walked backwards and forwards in the room , and drops of perspiration ran down from his forehead .
then he opened the window to get some fresh air , but before he was aware , the head - servant had given him such a kick that he flew through the window out into the air , and so far away that no one ever saw him again .
then said the head - servant to the bailiff ' s wife , " if he does not come back , you must take the other blow ."
she cried , " no , no i cannot bear it ," and opened the other window , because drops of perspiration were running down her forehead .
then he gave her such a kick that she , too , flew out , and as she was lighter she went much higher than her husband .
her husband cried , " do come to me ," but she replied , " come thou to me , i cannot come to thee ."
and they hovered about there in the air , and could not get to each other , and whether they are still hovering about , or not , i do not know , but the young giant took up his iron bar , and went on his way .
