there was a certain merchant who had two children , a boy and a girl ; they were both young , and could not walk .
and two richly - laden ships of his sailed forth to sea with all his property on board , and just as he was expecting to win much money by them , news came that they had gone to the bottom , and now instead of being a rich man he was a poor one , and had nothing left but one field outside the town .
in order to drive his misfortune a little out of his thoughts , he went out to this field , and as he was walking forwards and backwards in it , a little black mannikin stood suddenly by his side , and asked why he was so sad , and what he was taking so much to heart .
then said the merchant , " if thou couldst help me i would willingly tell thee ."
- " who knows ?"
replied the black dwarf .
" perhaps , i can help thee ."
then the merchant told him that all he possessed had gone to the bottom of the sea , and that he had nothing left but this field .
" do not trouble thyself ," said the dwarf .
" if thou wilt promise to give me the first thing that rubs itself against thy leg when thou art at home again , and to bring it here to this place in twelve years ' time , thou shalt have as much money as thou wilt ."
the merchant thought , " what can that be but my dog ?"
and did not remember his little boy , so he said yes , gave the black man a written and sealed promise , and went home . when he reached home , his little boy was so delighted that he held by a bench , tottered up to him and seized him fast by the legs .
the father was shocked , for he remembered his promise , and now knew what he had pledged himself to do ; as however , he still found no money in his chest , he thought the dwarf had only been jesting .
a month afterwards he went up to the garret , intending to gather together some old tin and to sell it , and saw a great heap of money lying .
then he was happy again , made purchases , became a greater merchant than before , and felt that this world was well - governed .
in the meantime the boy grew tall , and at the same time sharp and clever .
but the nearer the twelfth year approached the more anxious grew the merchant , so that his distress might be seen in his face .
one day his son asked what ailed him , but the father would not say .
the boy , however , persisted so long , that at last he told him that without being aware of what he was doing , he had promised him to a black dwarf , and had received much money for doing so .
he said likewise that he had set his hand and seal to this , and that now when twelve years had gone by he would have to give him up .
then said the son , " oh , father , do not be uneasy , all will go well .
the black man has no power over me ."
the son had himself blessed by the priest , and when the time came , father and son went together to the field , and the son made a circle and placed himself inside it with his father .
then came the black dwarf and said to the old man , " hast thou brought with thee that which thou hast promised me ?"
he was silent , but the son asked , " what dost thou want here ?"
then said the black dwarf , " i have to speak with thy father , and not with thee ."
the son replied , " thou hast betrayed and misled my father , give back the writing ."
- " no ," said the black dwarf , " i will not give up my rights ."
they spoke together for a long time after this , but at last they agreed that the son , as he did not belong to the enemy of mankind , nor yet to his father , should seat himself in a small boat , which should lie on water which was flowing away from them , and that the father should push it off with his own foot , and then the son should remain given up to the water .
so he took leave of his father , placed himself in a little boat , and the father had to push it off with his own foot .
the boat capsized so that the keel was uppermost , and the father believed his son was lost , and went home and mourned for him . the boat , however , did not sink , but floated quietly away , and the boy sat safely inside it , and it floated thus for a long time , until at last it stopped by an unknown shore .
then he landed and saw a beautiful castle before him , and set out to go to it .
but when he entered it , he found that it was bewitched .
he went through every room , but all were empty until he reached the last , where a snake lay coiled in a ring .
the snake , however , was an enchanted maiden , who rejoiced to see him , and said , " hast thou come , oh , my deliverer ?
i have already waited twelve years for thee ; this kingdom is bewitched , and thou must set it free ."
- " how can i do that ?"
he inquired .
" to - night come twelve black men , covered with chains who will ask what thou art doing here ; keep silent ; give them no answer , and let them do what they will with thee ; they will torment thee , beat thee , stab thee ; let everything pass , only do not speak ; at twelve o ' clock , they must go away again .
on the second night twelve others will come ; on the third , four - and - twenty , who will cut off thy head , but at twelve o ' clock their power will be over , and then if thou hast endured all , and hast not spoken the slightest word , i shall be released .
i will come to thee , and will have , in a bottle , some of the water of life .
i will rub thee with that , and then thou wilt come to life again , and be as healthy as before ."
then said he , " i will gladly set thee free ."
and everything happened just as she had said ; the black men could not force a single word from him , and on the third night the snake became a beautiful princess , who came with the water of life and brought him back to life again .
so she threw herself into his arms and kissed him , and there was joy and gladness in the whole castle .
after this their marriage was celebrated , and he was king of the golden mountain . they lived very happily together , and the queen bore a fine boy .
eight years had already gone by , when the king bethought him of his father ; his heart was moved , and he wished to visit him .
the queen , however , would not let him go away , and said , " i know beforehand that it will cause my unhappiness ;" but he suffered her to have no rest until she consented .
at their parting she gave him a wishing - ring , and said , " take this ring and put it on thy finger , and then thou wilt immediately be transported whithersoever thou wouldst be , only thou must promise me not to use it in wishing me away from this place and with thy father ."
that he promised her , put the ring on his finger , and wished himself at home , just outside the town where his father lived .
instantly he found himself there , and made for the town , but when he came to the gate , the sentries would not let him in , because he wore such strange and yet such rich and magnificent clothing .
then he went to a hill where a shepherd was watching his sheep , changed clothes with him , put on his old shepherd ' s - coat , and then entered the town without hindrance .
when he came to his father , he made himself known to him , but he did not at all believe that the shepherd was his son , and said he certainly had had a son , but that he was dead long ago ; however , as he saw he was a poor , needy shepherd , he would give him something to eat .
then the shepherd said to his parents , " i am verily your son .
do you know of no mark on my body by which you could recognize me ?"
- " yes ," said his mother , " our son had a raspberry mark under his right arm ."
he slipped back his shirt , and they saw the raspberry under his right arm , and no longer doubted that he was their son .
then he told them that he was king of the golden mountain , and a king ' s daughter was his wife , and that they had a fine son of seven years old .
then said the father , " that is certainly not true ; it is a fine kind of a king who goes about in a ragged shepherd ' s - coat ."
on this the son fell in a passion , and without thinking of his promise , turned his ring round , and wished both his wife and child with him .
they were there in a second , but the queen wept , and reproached him , and said that he had broken his word , and had brought misfortune upon her .
he said , " i have done it thoughtlessly , and not with evil intention ," and tried to calm her , and she pretended to believe this ; but she had mischief in her mind . then he led her out of the town into the field , and showed her the stream where the little boat had been pushed off , and then he said , " i am tired ; sit down , i will sleep awhile on thy lap ."
and he laid his head on her lap , and fell asleep .
when he was asleep , she first drew the ring from his finger , then she drew away the foot which was under him , leaving only the slipper behind her , and she took her child in her arms , and wished herself back in her own kingdom .
when he awoke , there he lay quite deserted , and his wife and child were gone , and so was the ring from his finger , the slipper only was still there as a token .
" home to thy parents thou canst not return ," thought he , " they would say that thou wast a wizard ; thou must be off , and walk on until thou arrivest in thine own kingdom ."
so he went away and came at length to a hill by which three giants were standing , disputing with each other because they did not know how to divide their father ' s property .
when they saw him passing by , they called to him and said little men had quick wits , and that he was to divide their inheritance for them .
the inheritance , however , consisted of a sword , which had this prperty that if any one took it in his hand , and said , " all heads off but mine ," every head would lie on the ground ; secondly , of a cloak which made any one who put it on invisible ; thirdly , of a pair of boots which could transport the wearer to any place he wished in a moment .
he said , " give me the three things that i may see if they are still in good condition ."
they gave him the cloak , and when he had put it on , he was invisible and changed into a fly .
then he resumed his own form and said , " the cloak is a good one , now give me the sword ."
they said , " no , we will not give thee that ; if thou were to say , all heads off but mine ,' all our heads would be off , and thou alone wouldst be left with thine ."
nevertheless they gave it to him with the condition that he was only to try it against a tree .
this he did , and the sword cut in two the trunk of a tree as if it had been a blade of straw .
then he wanted to have the boots likewise , but they said , " no , we will not give them ; if thou hadst them on thy feet and wert to wish thyself at the top of the hill , we should be left down here with nothing ."
- " oh , no ," said he , " i will not do that ."
so they gave him the boots as well .
and now when he had got all these things , he thought of nothing but his wife and his child , and said as though to himself , " oh , if i were but on the golden mountain ," and at the same moment he vanished from the sight of the giants , and thus their inheritance was divided .
when he was near his palace , he heard sounds of joy , and fiddles , and flutes , and the people told him that his wife was celebrating her wedding with another .
then he fell into a rage , and said , " false woman , she betrayed and deserted me whilst i was asleep !"
so he put on his cloak , and unseen by all went into the palace .
when he entered the dining - hall a great table was spread with delicious food , and the guests were eating and drinking , and laughing , and jesting .
she sat on a royal seat in the midst of them in splendid apparel , with a crown on her head .
he placed himself behind her , and no one saw him .
when she put a piece of meat on a plate for herself , he took it away and ate it , and when she poured out a glass of wine for herself , he took it away and drank it .
she was always helping herself to something , and yet she never got anything , for plate and glass disappeared immediately .
then dismayed and ashamed , she arose and went to her chamber and wept , but he followed her there .
she said , " has the devil power over me , or did my deliverer never come ?"
then he struck her in the face , and said , " did thy deliverer never come ?
it is he who has thee in his power , thou traitor .
have i deserved this from thee ?"
then he made himself visible , went into the hall , and cried , " the wedding is at an end , the true king has returned ."
the kings , princes , and councillors who were assembled there , ridiculed and mocked him , but he did not trouble to answer them , and said , " will you go away , or not ?"
on this they tried to seize him and pressed upon him , but he drew his sword and said , " all heads off but mine ," and all the heads rolled on the ground , and he alone was master , and once more king of the golden mountain .
