there was once upon a time a queen who had a little daughter who was still so young that she had to be carried .
one day the child was naughty , and the mother might say what she liked , but the child would not be quiet .
then she became impatient , and as the ravens were flying about the palace , she opened the window and said , " i wish you were a raven and would fly away , and then i should have some rest ."
scarcely had she spoken the words , before the child was changed into a raven , and flew from her arms out of the window .
it flew into a dark forest , and stayed in it a long time , and the parents heard nothing of their child .
then one day a man was on his way through this forest and heard the raven crying , and followed the voice , and when he came nearer , the bird said , " i am a king ' s daughter by birth , and am bewitched , but thou canst set me free ."
- " what am i to do ," asked he .
she said , " go further into the forest , and thou wilt find a house , wherein sits an aged woman , who will offer thee meat and drink , but you must accept nothing , for if you eatest and drinkest anything , thou wilt fall into a sleep , and then thou wilt not be able to deliver me .
in the garden behind the house there is a great heap of tan , and on this thou shalt stand and wait for me .
for three days i will come every afternoon at two o ' clock in a carriage .
on the first day four white horses will be harnessed to it , then four chestnut horses , and lastly four black ones ; but if thou art not awake , but sleeping , i shall not be set free ."
the man promised to do everything that she desired , but the raven said , alas , " i know already that thou wilt not deliver me ; thou wilt accept something from the woman ."
then the man once more promised that he would certainly not touch anything either to eat or to drink .
but when he entered the house the old woman came to him and said , " poor man , how faint you are ; come and refresh yourself ; eat and drink ."
- " no ," said the man , " i will not eat or drink ."
she , however , let him have no peace , and said , " if you will not eat , take one drink out of the glass ; one is nothing ."
then he let himself be persuaded , and drank .
shortly before two o ' clock in the afternoon he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven .
as he was standing there , his weariness all at once became so great that he could not struggle against it , and lay down for a short time , but he was determined not to go to sleep .
hardly , however , had he lain down , than his eyes closed of their own accord , and he fell asleep and slept so soundly that nothing in the world could have aroused him .
at two o ' clock the raven came driving up with four white horses , but she was already in deep grief and said , " i know he is asleep ."
and when she came into the garden , he was indeed lying there asleep on the heap of tan .
she alighted from the carriage , went to him , shook him , and called him , but he did not awake .
next day about noon , the old woman came again and brought him food and drink , but he would not take any of it .
but she let him have no rest and persuaded him until at length he again took one drink out of the glass .
towards two o ' clock he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven , but all at once felt such a great weariness that his limbs would no longer support him .
he could not help himself , and was forced to lie down , and fell into a heavy sleep .
when the raven drove up with four brown horses , she was already full of grief , and said , " i know he is asleep ."
she went to him , but there he lay sleeping , and there was no wakening him .
next day the old woman asked what was the meaning of this ?
he was neither eating nor drinking anything ; did he want to die ?
he replied , " i am not allowed to eat or drink , and will not do so ."
but she set a dish with food , and a glass with wine before him , and when he smelt it he could not resist , and swallowed a deep draught .
when the time came , he went out into the garden to the heap of tan , and waited for the king ' s daughter ; but he became still more weary than on the day before , and lay down and slept as soundly as if he had been a stone .
at two o ' clock the raven came with four black horses , and the coachman and everything else was black .
she was already in the deepest grief , and said , " i know that he is asleep and cannot deliver me ."
when she came to him , there he was lying fast asleep .
she shook him and called him , but she could not waken him .
then she laid a loaf beside him , and after that a piece of meat , and thirdly a bottle of wine , and he might consume as much of all of them as he liked , but they would never grow less .
after this she took a gold ring from her finger , and put it on his , and her name was graven on it .
lastly , she laid a letter beside him wherein was written what she had given him , and that none of the things would ever grow less ; and in it was also written , " i see right well that here you will never be able to deliver me , but if thou art still willing to deliver me , come to the golden castle of stromberg ; it lies in thy power , of that i am certain ."
and when she had given him all these things , she seated herself in her carriage , and drove to the golden castle of stromberg . when the man awoke and saw that he had slept , he was sad at heart , and said , " she has certainly driven by , and i have not set her free ."
then he perceived the things which were lying beside him , and read the letter wherein was written how everything had happened .
so he arose and went away , intending to go to the golden castle of stromberg , but he did not know where it was .
after he had walked about the world for a long time , he entered into a dark forest , and walked for fourteen days , and still could not find his way out .
then it was once more evening , and he was so tired that he lay down in a thicket and fell asleep .
next day he went onwards , and in the evening , as he was again about to lie down beneath some bushes , he heard such a howling and crying that he could not go to sleep .
and at the time when people light the candles , he saw one glimmering , and arose and went towards it .
then he came to a house which seemed very small , for in front of it a great giant was standing .
he thought to himself , " if i go in , and the giant sees me , it will very likely cost me my life .
" at length he ventured it and went in .
when the giant saw him , he said , " it is well that thou comest , for it is long since i have eaten ; i will at once eat thee for my supper ."
- " i ' d rather you would leave that alone ," said the man , " i do not like to be eaten ; but if thou hast any desire to eat , i have quite enough here to satisfy thee ."
- " if that be true ," said the giant , " thou mayst be easy , i was only going to devour thee because i had nothing else ."
then they went , and sat down to the table , and the man took out the bread , wine , and meat which would never come to an end .
" this pleases me well ," said the giant , and ate to his heart ' s content .
then the man said to him , canst thou tell me where the golden castle of stromberg is ?"
the giant said , " i will look at my map ; all the towns , and villages , and houses are to be found on it ."
he brought out the map which he had in the room and looked for the castle , but it was not to be found on it .
" it ' s no matter !"
said he , " i have some still larger maps in my cupboard upstairs , and we will look in them ."
but there , too , it was in vain .
the man now wanted to go onwards , but the giant begged him to wait a few days longer until his brother , who had gone out to bring some provisions , came home .
when the brother came home they inquired about the golden castle of stromberg .
he replied , " when i have eaten and have had enough , i will look in the map ."
then he went with them up to his chamber , and they searched in his map , but could not find it .
then he brought out still older maps , and they never rested until they found the golden castle of stromberg , but it was many thousand miles away .
" how am i to get there ?"
asked the man .
the giant said , " i have two hours ' time , during which i will carry you into the neighbourhood , but after that i must be at home to suckle the child that we have ."
so the giant carried the man to about a hundred leagues from the castle , and said , " thou canst very well walk the rest of the way alone ."
and he turned back , but the man went onwards day and night , until at length he came to the golden castle of stromberg .
it stood on a glass - mountain , and the bewitched maiden drove in her carriage round the castle , and then went inside it .
he rejoiced when he saw her and wanted to climb up to her , but when he began to do so he always slipped down the glass again .
and when he saw that he could not reach her , he was filled with trouble , and said to himself , " i will stay down here below , and wait for her ."
so he built himself a hut and stayed in it for a whole year , and every day saw the king ' s daughter driving about above , but never could go to her .
then one day he saw from his hut three robbers who were beating each other , and cried to them , " god be with ye !"
they stopped when they heard the cry , but as they saw no one , they once more began to beat each other , and that too most dangerously .
so he again cried , " god be with ye !"
again they stopped , looked round about , but as they saw no one they went on beating each other .
then he cried for the third time , " god be with ye ," and thought , " i must see what these three are about ," and went thither and asked why they were beating each other so furiously .
one of them said that he found a stick , and that when he struck a door with it , that door would spring open .
the next said that he had found a mantle , and that whenever he put it on , he was invisible , but the third said he had found a horse on which a man could ride everywhere , even up the glass - mountain .
and now they did not know whether they ought to have these things in common , or whether they ought to divide them .
then the man said , " i will give you something in exchange for these three things .
money indeed have i not , but i have other things of more value ; but first i must try yours to see if you have told the truth ."
then they put him on the horse , threw the mantle round him , and gave him the stick in his hand , and when he had all these things they were no longer able to see him .
so he gave them some vigorous blows and cried , " now , vagabonds , you have got what you deserve , are you satisfied ?"
and he rode up the glass - mountain , but when he came in front of the castle at the top , it was shut .
then he struck the door with his stick , and it sprang open immediately .
he went in and ascended the stairs until he came to the hall where the maiden was sitting with a golden cup full of wine before her .
she , however , could not see him because he had the mantle on .
and when he came up to her , he drew from his finger the ring which she had given him , and threw it into the cup so that it rang .
then she cried , " that is my ring , so the man who is to set me free must be here ."
they searched the whole castle and did not find him , but he had gone out , and had seated himself on the horse and thrown off the mantle .
when they came to the door , they saw him and cried aloud in their delight .
* then he alighted and took the king ' s daughter in his arms , but she kissed him and said , " now hast thou set me free , and to - morrow we will celebrate our wedding ."
