one day anansi the spider picked some very fat and tasty vegetables from his garden .
he baked them with much care and they came out smelling delicious .
he could not wait to sit down and eat them .
just then there was a knock at his door .
it was turtle , who had been traveling all day and was very tired and hungry .
" hello , anansi ," said turtle .
" i have been walking for so long , and i smelt the most delicious vegetables i have ever smelt .
would you be so kind as to share your meal with me ?
" anansi could not refuse , for it was the custom in his country to share your meal with visitors at mealtime .
but he was not very happy , for anansi was a little too greedy and wanted the delicious vegetables all to himself .
so anansi thought for a while and came up with a scheme .
" please do come in , turtle .
i would be honored to have you as my guest this evening .
sit down , grab a chair and help yourself .
" turtle came inside and sat down , but just as he reached for a vegetable , anansi yelled , " turtle , don ' t you know better than to come to the table with dirty hands ?
" turtle looked down at his hands and saw that they were filthy .
he had been crawling all day and had not had a chance to clean up .
turtle got up and went to the river to clean his feet .
he walked , slowly like all turtles , all the way back up to the house , and when he returned , anansi had already begun to eat .
" i didn ' t want these tasty vegetables to get cold , so i had to begin ," said anansi .
" but please do join me now , turtle .
" turtle sat down again and reached for a vegetable , but again anansi yelled at him .
" turtle , did you not hear me before ?
it is not polite to come to the table with dirty hands !
" he looked down and saw that his clean hands had turned dirty once more , since he had to crawl on them to get back to the house .
so he walked down to the river once more to wash himself .
and when he returned this time , he was careful to walk on the grass so his hands would stay clean .
but by the time he sat down at the table , anansi had finished up the tasty vegetables and not a single bit was left .
turtle looked at anansi for a moment and then said , " thank you for sharing your meal with me .
if you ever find yourself near my house , please let me return the favour .
" and then he slowly walked out the door and continued his way .
the days went by and anansi thought more and more of that meal that turtle had offered .
he got more and more interested in a free dinner and finally could not stand it anymore .
he set off one day to find turtle ' s house .
he found turtle sunning himself on a riverbank just around dinnertime .
turtle looked up and said , " hello , anansi , have you come to share an evening meal with me ?
"" oh yes , yes !"
said anansi , who was growing hungrier and hungrier by the minute .
turtle went underwater to his house to set the dinner table for dinner .
soon he came back to the bank and said , " your place is waiting and the food is ready .
please join me , anansi .
" and then he dived underwater and began to slowly eat his meal .
anansi jumped into the water , but could not get down to the bottom of the river .
he tried to swim down , but he was so light that he kept popping back up to the surface .
he tried diving , and he tried a backcrawl .
he tried a running jump , but nothing would help him get down to the river bottom .
in the meantime , turtle was slowly eating his meal .
anansi was not about to give up a free meal , and went to the riverside wondering what he would do .
finally he had an idea .
he started grabbing stones and rocks and stuffed them into his jacket pockets .
now when he jumped into the water he sank right down to the bottom and was able to take his place at the table .
the table was a beautiful banquet full of delicious foods .
anansi could hardly believe how many tasty food was before him and could not wait to start .
but just as he reached for the first morsel , turtle stopped eating and said : " in my country , we do not wear our jackets to the table .
" anansi noticed that turtle had removed his own jacket before sitting down .
anansi started to remove his jacket , and as soon as it was off of his shoulders , he went straight back up to the surface .
he stuck his head down into the water and saw turtle , down there , slowly enjoying that wonderful banquet .
