about a thousand or more years ago , there were in this country nothing but small kings , and one of them who lived on the keuterberg was very fond of hunting .
once on a time when he was riding forth from his castle with his huntsmen , three girls were watching their cows upon the mountain , and when they saw the king with all his followers , the eldest girl pointed to him , and called to the two other girls , " if i do not get that one , i will have none ."
then the second girl answered from the other side of the hill , and pointed to the one who was on the king ' s right hand , " hilloa !
hilloa !
if i do not get him , i will have no one ."
these , however , were the two ministers .
the king heard all this , and when he had come back from the chase , he caused the three girls to be brought to him , and asked them what they had said yesterday on the mountain .
this they would not tell him , so the king asked the eldest if she really would take him for her husband ?
then she said , " yes ," and the two ministers married the two sisters , for they were all three fair and beautiful of face , especially the queen , who had hair like flax .
but the two sisters had no children , and once when the king was obliged to go from home he invited them to come to the queen in order to cheer her , for she was about to bear a child .
she had a little boy who brought a bright red star into the world with him .
then the two sisters said to each other that they would throw the beautiful boy into the water .
when they had thrown him in ( i believe it was into the weser ) a little bird flew up into the air , which sang , " to thy death art thou sped , until god ' s word be said . in the white lily bloom , brave boy , is thy tomb ."
when the two heard that , they were frightened to death , and ran away in great haste .
when the king came home they told him that the queen had been delivered of a dog .
then the king said , " what god does , is well done !"
but a fisherman who dwelt near the water fished the little boy out again while he was still alive , and as his wife had no children , they reared him .
when a year had gone by , the king again went away , and the queen had another little boy , whom the false sisters likewise took and threw into the water .
then up flew a little bird again and sang , " to thy death art thou sped , until god ' s word be said . in the white lily bloom , brave boy , is thy tomb ."
and when the king came back , they told him that the queen had once more given birth to a dog , and he again said , " what god does , is well done ."
the fisherman , however , fished this one also out of the water , and reared him . then the king again journeyed forth , and the queen had a little girl , whom also the false sisters threw into the water .
then again a little bird flew up on high and sang , " to thy death art thou speduntil god ' s word be said . in the white lily bloom , bonny girl , is thy tomb ."
and when the king came home they told him that the queen had been delivered of a cat .
then the king grew angry , and ordered his wife to be cast into prison , and therein was she shut up for many long years . in the meantime the children had grown up .
then eldest once went out with some other boys to fish , but the other boys would not have him with them , and said , " go thy way , foundling .
" hereupon he was much troubled , and asked the old fisherman if that was true ?
the fisherman told him that once when he was fishing he had drawn him out of the water .
so the boy said he would go forth and seek his father .
the fisherman , however , entreated him to stay , but he would not let himself be hindered , and at last the fisherman consented .
then the boy went on his way and walked for many days , and at last he came to a great piece of water by the side of which stood an old woman fishing .
" good day , mother ," said the boy .
" many thanks ," said she .
" thou wilt fish long enough before thou catchest anything .
"" and thou wilt seek long enough before thou findest thy father .
how wilt thou get over the water ?"
said the woman .
" god knows .
" then the old woman took him up on her back and carried him through it , and he sought for a long time , but could not find his father . when a year had gone by , the second boy set out to seek his brother .
he came to the water , and all fared with him just as with his brother .
and now there was no one at home but the daughter , and she mourned for her brothers so much that at last she also begged the fisherman to let her set forth , for she wished to go in search of her brothers .
then she likewise came to the great piece of water , and she said to the old woman , " good day , mother .
"" many thanks ," replied the old woman .
" may god help you with your fishing ," said the maiden .
when the old woman heard that , she became quite friendly , and carried her over the water , gave her a wand , and said to her , " go , my daughter , ever onwards by this road , and when you come to a great black dog , you must pass it silently and boldly , without either laughing or looking at it .
then you will come to a great high castle , on the threshold of which you must let the wand fall , and go straight through the castle , and out again on the other side .
there you will see an old fountain out of which a large tree has grown , whereon hangs a bird in a cage which you must take down .
take likewise a glass of water out of the fountain , and with these two things go back by the same way .
pick up the wand again from the threshold and take it with you , and when you again pass by the dog , strike him in the face with it , but be sure that you hit him , and then just come back here to me ."
the maiden found everything exactly as the old woman had said , and on her way back she found her two brothers who had sought each other over half the world .
they went together to the place where the black dog was lying on the road ; she struck it in the face , and it turned into a handsome prince who went with them to the river .
there the old woman was still standing .
she rejoiced much to see them again , and carried them all over the water , and then she too went away , for now she was freed .
the others , however , went to the old fisherman , and all were glad that they had found each other again , but they hung the bird on the wall . but the second son could not settle at home , and took his cross - bow and went a - hunting .
when he was tired he took his flute , and made music .
the king was hunting too , and heard that and went thither , and when he met the youth , he said , " who has given thee leave to hunt here ?
"" oh , no one .
"" to whom dost thou belong , then ?
"" i am the fisherman ' s son .
"" but he has no children .
"" if thou wilt not believe , come with me .
" that the king did , and questioned the fisherman , who told everything to him , and the little bird on the wall began to sing , " the mother sits alonethere in the prison small , o king of royal blood , these are thy children all . the sisters twain so false , they wrought the children woe , there in the waters deepwhere the fishermen come and go ."
then they were all terrified , and the king took the bird , the fisherman and the three children back with him to the castle , and ordered the prison to be opened and brought his wife out again .
she had , however , grown quite ill and weak .
then the daughter gave her some of the water of the fountain to drink , and she became strong and healthy .
but the two false sisters were burnt , and the daughter married the prince .
