there was once a king who had an illness , and no one believed that he would come out of it with his life .
he had three sons who were much distressed about it , and went down into the palace - garden and wept .
there they met an old man who inquired as to the cause of their grief .
they told him that their father was so ill that he would most certainly die , for nothing seemed to cure him .
then the old man said , " i know of one more remedy , and that is the water of life ; if he drinks of it he will become well again ; but it is hard to find ."
the eldest said , " i will manage to find it ," and went to the sick king , and begged to be allowed to go forth in search of the water of life , for that alone could save him .
" no ," said the king , " the danger of it is too great .
i would rather die ."
but he begged so long that the king consented .
the prince thought in his heart , " if i bring the water , then i shall be best beloved of my father , and shall inherit the kingdom ."
so he set out , and when he had ridden forth a little distance , a dwarf stood there in the road who called to him and said , " whither away so fast ?"
- " silly shrimp ," said the prince , very haughtily , " it is nothing to do with you ," and rode on .
but the little dwarf had grown angry , and had wished an evil wish .
soon after this the prince entered a ravine , and the further he rode the closer the mountains drew together , and at last the road became so narrow that he could not advance a step further ; it was impossible either to turn his horse or to dismount from the saddle , and he was shut in there as if in prison .
the sick king waited long for him , but he came not .
then the second son said , " father , let me go forth to seek the water ," and thought to himself , " if my brother is dead , then the kingdom will fall to me ."
at first the king would not allow him to go either , but at last he yielded , so the prince set out on the same road that his brother had taken , and he too met the dwarf , who stopped him to ask , whither he was going in such haste ?
" little shrimp ," said the prince , " that is nothing to thee ," and rode on without giving him another look .
but the dwarf bewitched him , and he , like the other , rode into a ravine , and could neither go forwards nor backwards .
so fare haughty people . as the second son also remained away , the youngest begged to be allowed to go forth to fetch the water , and at last the king was obliged to let him go .
when he met the dwarf and the latter asked him whither he was going in such haste , he stopped , gave him an explanation , and said , " i am seeking the water of life , for my father is sick unto death ."
- " dost thou know , then , where that is to be found ?"
- " no ," said the prince .
" as thou hast borne thyself as is seemly , and not haughtily like thy false brothers , i will give thee the information and tell thee how thou mayst obtain the water of life .
it springs from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted castle , but thou wilt not be able to make thy way to it , if i do not give thee an iron wand and two small loaves of bread .
strike thrice with the wand on the iron door of the castle and it will spring open : inside lie two lions with gaping jaws , but if thou throwest a loaf to each of them , they will be quieted .
then hasten to fetch some of the water of life before the clock strikes twelve , else the door will shut again , and thou wilt be imprisoned ."
the prince thanked him , took the wand and the bread , and set out on his way .
when he arrived , everything was as the dwarf had said .
the door sprang open at the third stroke of the wand , and when he had appeased the lions with the bread , he entered the castle , and came to a large and splendid hall , wherein sat some enchanted princes whose rings he drew off their fingers .
a sword and a loaf of bread were lying there , which he carried away .
after this , he entered a chamber , in which was a beautiful maiden who rejoiced when she saw him , kissed him , and told him that he had delivered her , and should have the whole of her kingdom , and that if he would return in a year their wedding should be celebrated ; likewise she told him where the spring of the water of life was , and that he was to hasten and draw some of it before the clock struck twelve .
then he went onwards , and at last entered a room where there was a beautiful newly - made bed , and as he was very weary , he felt inclined to rest a little .
so he lay down and fell asleep .
when he awoke , it was striking a quarter to twelve .
he sprang up in a fright , ran to the spring , drew some water in a cup which stood near , and hastened away .
but just as he was passing through the iron door , the clock struck twelve , and the door fell to with such violence that it carried away a piece of his heel .
he , however , rejoicing at having obtained the water of life , went homewards , and again passed the dwarf .
when the latter saw the sword and the loaf , he said , " with these thou hast won great wealth ; with the sword thou canst slay whole armies , and the bread will never come to an end ."
but the prince would not go home to his father without his brothers , and said , " dear dwarf , canst thou not tell me where my two brothers are ?
they went out before i did in search of the water of life , and have not returned ."
- " they are imprisoned between two mountains ," said the dwarf .
" i have condemned them to stay there , because they were so haughty ."
then the prince begged until the dwarf released them ; but he warned him , however , and said , " beware of them , for they have bad hearts ."
when his brothers came , he rejoiced , and told them how things had gone with him , that he had found the water of life and had brought a cupful away with him , and had rescued a beautiful princess , who was willing to wait a year for him , and then their wedding was to be celebrated and he would obtain a great kingdom .
after that they rode on together , and chanced upon a land where war and famine reigned , and the king already thought he must perish , for the scarcity was so great .
then the prince went to him and gave him the loaf , wherewith he fed and satisfied the whole of his kingdom , and then the prince gave him the sword also wherewith he slew the hosts of his enemies , and could now live in rest and peace .
the prince then took back his loaf and his sword , and the three brothers rode on .
but after this they entered two more countries where war and famine reigned and each time the prince gave his loaf and his sword to the kings , and had now delivered three kingdoms , and after that they went on board a ship and sailed over the sea .
during the passage , the two eldest conversed apart and said , " the youngest has found the water of life and not we , for that our father will give him the kingdom the kingdom which belongs to us , and he will rob us of all our fortune ."
they then began to seek revenge , and plotted with each other to destroy him .
they waited until they found him fast asleep , then they poured the water of life out of the cup , and took it for themselves , but into the cup they poured salt sea - water .
now therefore , when they arrived home , the youngest took his cup to the sick king in order that he might drink out of it , and be cured .
but scarcely had he drunk a very little of the salt sea - water than he became still worse than before .
and as he was lamenting over this , the two eldest brothers came , and accused the youngest of having intended to poison him , and said that they had brought him the true water of life , and handed it to him .
he had scarcely tasted it , when he felt his sickness departing , and became strong and healthy as in the days of his youth .
after that they both went to the youngest , mocked him , and said , " you certainly found the water of life , but you have had the pain , and we the gain ; you should have been sharper , and should have kept your eyes open .
we took it from you whilst you were asleep at sea , and when a year is over , one of us will go and fetch the beautiful princess .
but beware that you do not disclose aught of this to our father ; indeed he does not trust you , and if you say a single word , you shall lose your life into the bargain , but if you keep silent , you shall have it as a gift .
" the old king was angry with his youngest son , and thought he had plotted against his life .
so he summoned the court together and had sentence pronounced upon his son , that he should be secretly shot .
and once when the prince was riding forth to the chase , suspecting no evil , the king ' s huntsman had to go with him , and when they were quite alone in the forest , the huntsman looked so sorrowful that the prince said to him , " dear huntsman , what ails you ?"
the huntsman said , " i cannot tell you , and yet i ought ."
then the prince said , " say openly what it is , i will pardon you ."
- " alas !"
said the huntsman , " i am to shoot you dead , the king has ordered me to do it ."
then the prince was shocked , and said , " dear huntsman , let me live ; there , i give you my royal garments ; give me your common ones in their stead ."
the huntsman said , " i will willingly do that , indeed i should not have been able to shoot you ."
then they exchanged clothes , and the huntsman returned home ; the prince , however , went further into the forest .
after a time three waggons of gold and precious stones came to the king for his youngest son , which were sent by the three kings who had slain their enemies with the prince ' s sword , and maintained their people with his bread , and who wished to show their gratitude for it .
the old king then thought , " can my son have been innocent ?"
and said to his people , " would that he were still alive , how it grieves me that i have suffered him to be killed !"
- " he still lives ," said the huntsman , " i could not find it in my heart to carry out your command ," and told the king how it had happened .
then a stone fell from the king ' s heart , and he had it proclaimed in every country that his son might return and be taken into favour again . the princess , however , had a road made up to her palace which was quite bright and golden , and told her people that whosoever came riding straight along it to her , would be the right wooer and was to be admitted , and whoever rode by the side of it , was not the right one , and was not to be admitted .
as the time was now close at hand , the eldest thought he would hasten to go to the king ' s daughter , and give himself out as her deliverer , and thus win her for his bride , and the kingdom to boot .
therefore he rode forth , and when he arrived in front of the palace , and saw the splendid golden road , he thought , it would be a sin and a shame if he were to ride over that , and turned aside , and rode on the right side of it .
but when he came to the door , the servants told him that he was not the right man , and was to go away again .
soon after this the second prince set out , and when he came to the golden road , and his horse had put one foot on it , he thought , it would be a sin and a shame to tread a piece of it off , and he turned aside and rode on the left side of it , and when he reached the door , the attendants told him he was not the right one , and he was to go away again .
when at last the year had entirely expired , the third son likewise wished to ride out of the forest to his beloved , and with her forget his sorrows .
so he set out and thought of her so incessantly , and wished to be with her so much , that he never noticed the golden road at all .
so his horse rode onwards up the middle of it , and when he came to the door , it was opened and the princess received him with joy , and said he was her deliverer , and lord of the kingdom , and their wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing .
when it was over she told him that his father invited him to come to him , and had forgiven him .
so he rode thither , and told him everything ; how his brothers had betrayed him , and how he had nevertheless kept silence .
the old king wished to punish them , but they had put to sea , and never came back as long as they lived .
