there was once on a time a poor peasant called crabb , who drove with two oxen a load of wood to the town , and sold it to a doctor for two thalers .
when the money was being counted out to him , it so happened that the doctor was sitting at table , and when the peasant saw how daintily he ate and drank , his heart desired what he saw , and he would willingly have been a doctor too .
so he remained standing a while , and at length inquired if he too could not be a doctor .
" oh , yes ," said the doctor , " that is soon managed ."
- " what must i do ?"
asked the peasant .
" in the first place buy thyself an a b c book of the kind which has a cock on the frontispiece : in the second , turn thy cart and thy two oxen into money , and get thyself some clothes , and whatsoever else pertains to medicine ; thirdly , have a sign painted for thyself with the words , " i am doctor knowall ," and have that nailed up above thy house - door ."
the peasant did everything that he had been told to do .
when he had doctored people awhile , but not long , a rich and great lord had some money stolen .
then he was told about doctor knowall who lived in such and such a village , and must know what had become of the money .
so the lord had the horses put in his carriage , drove out to the village , and asked crabb if he were doctor knowall ?
yes , he was , he said .
then he was to go with him and bring back the stolen money .
" oh , yes , but grethe , my wife , must go too ."
the lord was willing and let both of them have a seat in the carriage , and they all drove away together .
when they came to the nobleman ' s castle , the table was spread , and crabb was told to sit down and eat .
" yes , but my wife , grethe , too ," said he , and he seated himself with her at the table .
and when the first servant came with a dish of delicate fare , the peasant nudged his wife , and said , " grethe , that was the first ," meaning that was the servant who brought the first dish .
the servant , however , thought he intended by that to say , " that is the first thief ," and as he actually was so , he was terrified , and said to his comrade outside , " the doctor knows all : we shall fare ill , he said i was the first ."
the second did not want to go in at all , but was forced .
so when he went in with his dish , the peasant nudged his wife , and said , " grethe , that is the second ."
this servant was just as much alarmed , and he got out .
the third did not fare better , for the peasant again said , " grethe , that is the third ."
the fourth had to carry in a dish that was covered , and the lord told the doctor that he was to show his skill , and guess what was beneath the cover .
the doctor looked at the dish , had no idea what to say , and cried , " ah , poor crabb ."
when the lord heard that , he cried , " there !
he knows it , he knows who has the money !
" on this the servants looked terribly uneasy , and made a sign to the doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment .
when therefore he went out , all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen the money , and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a heavy sum into the bargain , if he would not denounce them , for if he did they would be hanged .
they led him to the spot where the money was concealed .
with this the doctor was satisfied , and returned to the hall , sat down to the table , and said , " my lord , now will i search in my book where the gold is hidden ."
the fifth servant , however , crept into the stove to hear if the doctor knew still more .
the doctor , however , sat still and opened his a b c book , turned the pages backwards and forwards , and looked for the cock .
as he could not find it immediately he said , " i know you are there , so you had better show yourself ."
then the fellow in the stove thought that the doctor meant him , and full of terror , sprang out , crying , " that man knows everything !"
then dr . knowall showed the count where the money was , but did not say who had stolen it , and received from both sides much money in reward , and became a renowned man .
