once upon a time there was a poor woodcutter who worked from morning until late at night .
when he had finally saved up some money he said to his boy , " you are my only child .
i want to spend the money that i have earned by the sweat of my brow on your education .
learn an honest trade so you can support me in my old age when my limbs have grown stiff and i have to sit at home ."
then the boy went to a university and studied diligently .
his teachers praised him , and he remained there for some time .
after he had worked through a few classes , but was still not perfect in everything , the little pittance that the father had saved was all spent , and the boy had to return home to him .
" oh ," said the father sadly , " i cannot give you anything more , and in these hard times i cannot earn a heller more than what we need for our daily bread ."
- " father , dear ," answered the son , " don ' t worry about it .
if it is god ' s will everything will turn out well for me .
i will do all right ."
when the father said he was going into the woods and earn some money by cutting cordwood , the son said , " i will go with you and help you ."
- " no , my son ," said the father , " you will find it too difficult .
you are not used to hard work , and will not be able to do it .
furthermore , i have only one ax and no money left to buy another one with ."
- " just go to the neighbor ," answered the son .
" he will lend you his ax until i have earned enough to buy one for myself .
" so the father borrowed an ax from the neighbor , and the next morning at daybreak they went out into the woods together .
the son helped his father and was quite cheerful and full of energy .
when the sun was directly above them , the father said , " let us rest now and eat our noon meal .
then all will go twice as well ."
the son picked up his bread and said , " just you rest , father .
i am not tired .
i will walk about a little in the woods and look for birds ' nests ."
- " oh , you fool ," said the father , " why do you want to run about ?
afterwards you will be tired and no longer able to lift an arm .
stay here , and sit down beside me .
" but the son went into the woods , ate his bread , was very cheerful , and looked into the green branches to see if he could find a bird ' s nest .
he walked to and fro until at last he came to an enormous oak that was certainly many hundred years old , and that five men would not have been able to span .
he stood there looking at it , and thought , " many a bird must have built its nest in that tree ."
then suddenly he thought that he heard a voice .
listening , he became aware of someone calling out with a muffled voice , " let me out .
let me out ."
he looked around but could not see anything .
then he thought that the voice was coming out of the ground , so he shouted , " where are you ?"
the voice answered , " i am stuck down here among the oak roots .
let me out .
let me out ."
the student began to scrape about beneath the tree , searching among the roots , until at last he found a glass bottle in a little opening .
lifting it up , he held it against the light , and then saw something shaped like a frog jumping up and down inside .
" let me out .
let me out ," it cried again , and the student , thinking no evil , pulled the cork from the bottle .
immediately a spirit ascended from it and began to grow .
it grew so fast that within a few moments a horrible fellow , half as big as the tree , was standing there before the student .
" do you know ," he cried in an terrifying voice , " what your reward is for having let me out ?"
- " no ," replied the student fearlessly .
" how should i know that ?"
- " then i will tell you ," shouted the spirit .
" i must break your neck for it ."
- " you should have said so sooner ," answered the student , " for then i would have left you shut up inside .
however , my head is going to stay where it is until more people have been consulted ."
- " more people here , more people there ," shouted the spirit .
" you shall have the reward you have earned .
do you think that i was shut up there for such a long time as a favor ?
no , it was a punishment .
i am the mighty mercurius .
i must break the neck of whomsoever releases me ."
- " calm down ," answered the student .
" not so fast .
first i must know that you really were shut up in that little bottle , and that you are the right spirit .
if you can indeed get inside again , then i will believe it , and you may do with me whatsoever you want ."
the spirit said arrogantly , " that is an easy trick ," pulling himself in and making himself as thin and short as he had been before .
he then crept back into the opening and through the neck of the bottle .
he was scarcely inside when the student pushed the cork back into the bottle , and threw it back where it had been among the oak roots .
and thus the spirit was deceived . the student was about to return to his father , but the spirit cried out pitifully , " oh , do let me out .
oh , do let me out ."
- " no ," answered the student , " not a second time .
i will not release a person who once tried to kill me , now that i have captured him again ."
- " if you will set me free ," cried the spirit , " i will give you so much that you will have enough for all the days of your life ."
- " no ," answered the student , " you would cheat me like you tried to the first time ."
- " you are giving away your own good fortune ," said the spirit .
" i will not harm you , but instead will reward you richly ."
the student thought , " i will venture it .
perhaps he will keep his word , and in any event he will not get the better of me ."
so he pulled out the cork , and the spirit rose up from the bottle as before , and extended himself , becoming as large as a giant .
" now you shall have your reward ," he said , handing the student a little rag that looked just like a small bandage .
he said , " if you rub a wound with the one end , it will heal , and if you rub steel or iron with the other end , it will turn into silver ."
- " i have to try that ," said the student .
he went to a tree , scratched the bark with his ax , then rubbed it with the one end of the bandage .
it immediately closed together and was healed .
" now it is all right ," he said to the spirit , " and we can part ."
the spirit thanked him for having freed him , and the student thanked the spirit for the present , and returned to his father .
" where have you been running about ?"
said the father .
" why have you forgotten your work ?
i said that you wouldn ' t get anything done ."
- " don ' t be concerned , father .
i will make it up ."
- " make it up indeed ," said the father angrily .
" don ' t bother ."
- " just watch , father .
i will soon cut down that tree there and make it crash ."
then he took his bandage , rubbed the ax with it , and struck a mighty blow , but because the iron had turned into silver , the cutting edge bent back on itself .
" hey , father , just look what a bad ax you ' ve given me .
it is all bent out of shape ."
the father was shocked and said , " oh , what have you done !
now i ' ll have to pay for the ax , and i don ' t know what with .
that is all the good i have from your work ."
- " don ' t get angry ," said the son , " i will pay for the ax ."
- " oh , you blockhead ," cried the father , " how will you pay for it ?
you have nothing but what i give you .
you have students ' tricks stuck in your head , but you don ' t know anything about chopping wood .
" after a little while the student said , " father , i can ' t work any longer after all .
let ' s quit for the day ."
- " now then ," he answered , " do you think i can stand around with my hands in my pockets like you ?
i have to go on working , but you may head for home ."
- " father , i am here in these woods for the first time .
i don ' t know my way alone .
please go with me ."
his anger had now subsided , so the father at last let himself be talked into going home with him .
there he said to the son , " go and sell the damaged ax and see what you can get for it .
i will have to earn the difference , in order to pay the neighbor ."
the son picked up the ax and took it into town to a goldsmith , who tested it , weighed it , and then said , " it is worth four hundred talers .
i do not have that much cash with me ."
the student said , " give me what you have .
i will lend you the rest ."
the goldsmith gave him three hundred talers and owed him one hundred .
then the student went home and said , " father , i have some money .
go and ask the neighbor what he wants for the ax ."
- " i already know ," answered the old man .
" one taler , six groschens ."
- " then give him two talers , twelve groschens .
that is double its worth and is plenty .
see , i have more than enough money ."
then he gave the father a hundred talers , saying , " you shall never need anything .
live just like you want to ."
- " my goodness ," said the old man .
" where did you get all that money ?"
then the son told him everything that had happened , and how by trusting in his luck he had made such a catch .
with the money that was left he went back to the university and continued his studies , and because he could heal all wounds with his bandage he became the most famous doctor in the whole world .
