there was once a young fellow who enlisted as a soldier , conducted himself bravely , and was always the foremost when it rained bullets .
so long as the war lasted , all went well , but when peace was made , he received his dismissal , and the captain said he might go where he liked .
his parents were dead , and he had no longer a home , so he went to his brothers and begged them to take him in , and keep him until war broke out again .
the brothers , however , were hard - hearted and said , " what can we do with thee ?
thou art of no use to us ; go and make a living for thyself ."
the soldier had nothing left but his gun ; he took that on his shoulder , and went forth into the world .
he came to a wide heath , on which nothing was to be seen but a circle of trees ; under these he sat sorrowfully down , and began to think over his fate .
" i have no money ," thought he , " i have learnt no trade but that of fighting , and now that they have made peace they don ' t want me any longer ; so i see beforehand that i shall have to starve ."
all at once he heard a rustling , and when he looked round , a strange man stood before him , who wore a green coat and looked right stately , but had a hideous cloven foot .
" i know already what thou art in need of ," said the man ; " gold and possessions shall thou have , as much as thou canst make away with do what thou wilt , but first i must know if thou art fearless , that i may not bestow my money in vain ."
- " a soldier and fear - how can those two things go together ?"
he answered ; " thou canst put me to the proof ."
- " very well , then ," answered the man , " look behind thee ."
the soldier turned round , and saw a large bear , which came growling towards him .
" oho !"
cried the soldier , " i will tickle thy nose for thee , so that thou shalt soon lose thy fancy for growling ," and he aimed at the bear and shot it through the muzzle ; it fell down and never stirred again .
" i see quite well ," said the stranger , " that thou art not wanting in courage , but there is still another condition which thou wilt have to fulfil ."
- " if it does not endanger my salvation ," replied the soldier , who knew very well who was standing by him .
" if it does , i ' ll have nothing to do with it ."
- " thou wilt look to that for thyself ," answered greencoat ; " thou shalt for the next seven years neither wash thyself , nor comb thy beard , nor thy hair , nor cut thy nails , nor say one paternoster .
i will give thee a coat and a cloak , which during this time thou must wear .
if thou diest during these seven years , thou art mine ; if thou remainest alive , thou art free , and rich to boot , for all the rest of thy life ."
the soldier thought of the great extremity in which he now found himself , and as he so often had gone to meet death , he resolved to risk it now also , and agreed to the terms .
the devil took off his green coat , gave it to the soldier , and said , " if thou hast this coat on thy back and puttest thy hand into the pocket , thou wilt always find it full of money ."
then he pulled the skin off the bear and said , " this shall be thy cloak , and thy bed also , for thereon shalt thou sleep , and in no other bed shalt thou lie , and because of this apparel shalt thou be called bearskin ."
after this the devil vanished . the soldier put the coat on , felt at once in the pocket , and found that the thing was really true .
then he put on the bearskin and went forth into the world , and enjoyed himself , refraining from nothing that did him good and his money harm .
during the first year his appearance was passable , but during the second he began to look like a monster .
his hair covered nearly the whole of his face , his beard was like a piece of coarse felt , his fingers had claws , and his face was so covered with dirt that if cress had been sown on it , it would have come up .
whosoever saw him , ran away , but as he everywhere gave the poor money to pray that he might not die during the seven years , and as he paid well for everything he still always found shelter .
in the fourth year , he entered an inn where the landlord would not receive him , and would not even let him have a place in the stable , because he was afraid the horses would be scared .
but as bearskin thrust his hand into his pocket and pulled out a handful of ducats , the host let himself be persuaded and gave him a room in an outhouse .
bearskin was , however , obliged to promise not to let himself be seen , lest the inn should get a bad name . as bearskin was sitting alone in the evening , and wishing from the bottom of his heart that the seven years were over , he heard a loud lamenting in a neighboring room .
he had a compassionate heart , so he opened the door , and saw an old man weeping bitterly , and wringing his hands .
bearskin went nearer , but the man sprang to his feet and tried to escape from him .
at last when the man perceived that bearskin ' s voice was human he let himself be prevailed on , and by kind words bearskin succeeded so far that the old man revealed the cause of his grief .
his property had dwindled away by degrees , he and his daughters would have to starve , and he was so poor that he could not pay the innkeeper , and was to be put in prison .
" if that is your only trouble ," said bearskin , " i have plenty of money ."
he caused the innkeeper to be brought thither , paid him and put a purse full of gold into the poor old man ' s pocket besides . when the old man saw himself set free from all his troubles he did not know how to be grateful enough .
" come with me ," said he to bearskin ; " my daughters are all miracles of beauty , choose one of them for thyself as a wife .
when she hears what thou hast done for me , she will not refuse thee .
thou dost in truth look a little strange , but she will soon put thee to rights again ."
this pleased bearskin well , and he went .
when the eldest saw him she was so terribly alarmed at his face that she screamed and ran away .
the second stood still and looked at him from head to foot , but then she said , " how can i accept a husband who no longer has a human form ?
the shaven bear that once was here and passed itself off for a man pleased me far better , for at any rate it wore a hussar ' s dress and white gloves .
if it were nothing but ugliness , i might get used to that ."
the youngest , however , said , " dear father , that must be a good man to have helped you out of your trouble , so if you have promised him a bride for doing it , your promise must be kept ."
it was a pity that bearskin ' s face was covered with dirt and with hair , for if not they might have seen how delighted he was when he heard these words .
he took a ring from his finger , broke it in two , and gave her one half , the other he kept for himself .
he wrote his name , however , on her half , and hers on his , and begged her to keep her piece carefully , and then he took his leave and said , " i must still wander about for three years , and if i do not return then , thou art free , for i shall be dead .
but pray to god to preserve my life .
" the poor betrothed bride dressed herself entirely in black , and when she thought of her future bridegroom , tears came into her eyes .
nothing but contempt and mockery fell to her lot from her sisters .
" take care ," said the eldest , " if thou givest him thy hand , he will strike his claws into it ."
- " beware !"
said the second .
" bears like sweet things , and if he takes a fancy to thee , he will eat thee up ."
- " thou must always do as he likes ," began the elder again , " or else he will growl ."
and the second continued , " but the wedding will be a merry one , for bears dance well ."
the bride was silent , and did not let them vex her .
bearskin , however , travelled about the world from one place to another , did good where he was able , and gave generously to the poor that they might pray for him . at length , as the last day of the seven years dawned , he went once more out on to the heath , and seated himself beneath the circle of trees .
it was not long before the wind whistled , and the devil stood before him and looked angrily at him ; then he threw bearskin his old coat , and asked for his own green one back .
" we have not got so far as that yet ," answered bearskin , " thou must first make me clean ."
whether the devil liked it or not , he was forced to fetch water , and wash bearskin , comb his hair , and cut his nails .
after this , he looked like a brave soldier , and was much handsomer than he had ever been before . when the devil had gone away , bearskin was quite lighthearted .
he went into the town , put on a magnificent velvet coat , seated himself in a carriage drawn by four white horses , and drove to his bride ' s house .
no one recognized him , the father took him for a distinguished general , and led him into the room where his daughters were sitting .
he was forced to place himself between the two eldest , they helped him to wine , gave him the best pieces of meat , and thought that in all the world they had never seen a handsomer man .
the bride , however , sat opposite to him in her black dress , and never raised her eyes , nor spoke a word .
when at length he asked the father if he would give him one of his daughters to wife , the two eldest jumped up , ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses , for each of them fancied she was the chosen one .
the stranger , as soon as he was alone with his bride , brought out his half of the ring , and threw it in a glass of wine which he reached across the table to her .
she took the wine , but when she had drunk it , and found the half ring lying at the bottom , her heart began to beat .
she got the other half , which she wore on a ribbon round her neck , joined them , and saw that the two pieces fitted exactly together .
then said he , " i am thy betrothed bridegroom , whom thou sawest as bearskin , but through god ' s grace i have again received my human form , and have once more become clean ."
he went up to her , embraced her , and gave her a kiss .
in the meantime the two sisters came back in full dress , and when they saw that the handsome man had fallen to the share of the youngest , and heard that he was bearskin , they ran out full of anger and rage .
one of them drowned herself in the well , the other hanged herself on a tree .
in the evening , some one knocked at the door , and when the bridegroom opened it , it was the devil in his green coat , who said , " seest thou , i have now got two souls in the place of thy one !"
