once upon a time , long , long ago , there were two brothers , the one rich and the other poor .
when christmas eve came , the poor one had not a bite in the house , either of meat or bread ; so he went to his brother , and begged him , in god ' s name , to give him something for christmas day .
it was by no means the first time that the brother had been forced to give something to him , and he was not better pleased at being asked now than he generally was .
" if you will do what i ask you , you shall have a whole ham ," said he .
the poor one immediately thanked him , and promised this .
" well , here is the ham , and now you must go straight to dead man ' s hall ," said the rich brother , throwing the ham to him .
" well , i will do what i have promised ," said the other , and he took the ham and set off .
he went on and on for the livelong day , and at nightfall he came to a place where there was a bright light .
" i have no doubt this is the place ," thought the man with the ham . an old man with a long white beard was standing in the outhouse , chopping yule logs .
" good - evening ," said the man with the ham .
" good - evening to you .
where are you going at this late hour ?"
said the man .
" i am going to dead man ' s hall , if only i am in the right track ," answered the poor man ." oh !
yes , you are right enough , for it is here ," said the old man .
" when you get inside they will all want to buy your ham , for they don ' t get much meat to eat there ; but you must not sell it unless you can get the hand - mill which stands behind the door for it .
when you come out again i will teach you how to stop the hand - mill , which is useful for almost everything .
" so the man with the ham thanked the other for his good advice , and rapped at the door . when he got in , everything happened just as the old man had said it would : all the people , great and small , came round him like ants on an ant - hill , and each tried to outbid the other for the ham .
" by rights my old woman and i ought to have it for our christmas dinner , but , since you have set your hearts upon it , i must just give it up to you ," said the man .
" but , if i sell it , i will have the hand - mill which is standing there behind the door .
" at first they would not hear of this , and haggled and bargained with the man , but he stuck to what he had said , and the people were forced to give him the hand - mill .
when the man came out again into the yard , he asked the old wood - cutter how he was to stop the hand - mill , and when he had learnt that he thanked him and set off home with all the speed he could , but did not get there until after the clock had struck twelve on christmas eve .
" but where in the world have you been ?"
said the old woman .
" here i have sat waiting hour after hour , and have not even two sticks to lay across each other under the christmas porridge - pot ."" oh !
i could not come before ; i had something of importance to see about , and a long way to go , too ; but now you shall just see !"
said the man , and then he set the hand - mill on the table , and bade it first grind light , then a table - cloth , and then meat , and beer , and everything else that was good for a christmas eve ' s supper ; and the mill ground all that he ordered .
" bless me !"
said the old woman as one thing after another appeared ; and she wanted to know where her husband had got the mill from , but he would not tell her that .
" never mind where i got it ; you can see that it is a good one , and the water that turns it will never freeze ," said the man .
so he ground meat and drink , and all kinds of good things , to last all christmas - tide , and on the third day he invited all his friends to come to a feast . now when the rich brother saw all that there was at the banquet and in the house , he was both vexed and angry , for he grudged everything his brother had .
" on christmas eve he was so poor that he came to me and begged for a trifle , for god ' s sake , and now he gives a feast as if he were both a count and a king !"
thought he .
" but , for heaven ' s sake , tell me where you got your riches from ," said he to his brother .
" from behind the door ," said he who owned the mill , for he did not choose to satisfy his brother on that point ; but later in the evening , when he had taken a drop too much , he could not refrain from telling how he had come by the hand - mill .
" there you see what has brought me all my wealth !"
said he , and brought out the mill , and made it grind first one thing and then another .
when the brother saw that , he insisted on having the mill , and after a great deal of persuasion got it ; but he had to give three hundred dollars for it , and the poor brother was to keep it till the haymaking was over , for he thought : " if i keep it as long as that , i can make it grind meat and drink that will last many a long year ."
during that time you may imagine that the mill did not grow rusty , and when hay - harvest came the rich brother got it , but the other had taken good care not to teach him how to stop it .
it was evening when the rich man got the mill home , and in the morning he bade the old woman go out and spread the hay after the mowers , and he would attend to the house himself that day , he said . so , when dinner - time drew near , he set the mill on the kitchen - table , and said : " grind herrings and milk pottage , and do it both quickly and well .
" so the mill began to grind herrings and milk pottage , and first all the dishes and tubs were filled , and then it came out all over the kitchen - floor .
the man twisted and turned it , and did all he could to make the mill stop , but , howsoever he turned it and screwed it , the mill went on grinding , and in a short time the pottage rose so high that the man was like to be drowned .
so he threw open the parlour - door , but it was not long before the mill had ground the parlour full too , and it was with difficulty and danger that the man could go through the stream of pottage and get hold of the door - latch .
when he got the door open , he did not stay long in the room , but ran out , and the herrings and pottage came after him , and it streamed out over both farm and field .
now the old woman , who was out spreading the hay , began to think dinner was long in coming , and said to the women and the mowers : " though the master does not call us home , we may as well go .
it may be that he finds he is not good at making pottage and i should do well to help him ."
so they began to straggle homewards , but when they had got a little way up the hill they met the herrings and pottage and bread , all pouring forth and winding about one over the other , and the man himself in front of the flood .
" would to heaven that each of you had a hundred stomachs !
take care that you are not drowned in the pottage !"
he cried as he went by them as if mischief were at his heels , down to where his brother dwelt .
then he begged him , for god ' s sake , to take the mill back again , and that in an instant , for , said he : " if it grind one hour more the whole district will be destroyed by herrings and pottage ."
but the brother would not take it until the other paid him three hundred dollars , and that he was obliged to do .
now the poor brother had both the money and the mill again .
so it was not long before he had a farmhouse much finer than that in which his brother lived , but the mill ground him so much money that he covered it with plates of gold ; and the farmhouse lay close by the sea - shore , so it shone and glittered far out to sea .
everyone who sailed by there now had to be put in to visit the rich man in the gold farmhouse , and everyone wanted to see the wonderful mill , for the report of it spread far and wide , and there was no one who had not heard tell of it . after a long , long time came also a skipper who wished to see the mill .
he asked if it could make salt .
" yes , it could make salt ," said he who owned it , and when the skipper heard that he wished with all his might and main to have the mill , let it cost what it might , for , he thought , if he had it , he would get off having to sail far away over the perilous sea for freights of salt .
at first the man would not hear of parting with it , but the skipper begged and prayed , and at last the man sold it to him , and got many , many thousand dollars for it .
when the skipper had got the mill on his back he did not long stay there , for he was so afraid that the man should change his mind , and he had no time to ask how he was to stop it grinding , but got on board his ship as fast as he could . when he had gone a little way out to sea he took the mill on deck .
" grind salt , and grind both quickly and well ," said the skipper .
so the mill began to grind salt , till it spouted out like water , and when the skipper had got the ship filled he wanted to stop the mill , but whichsoever way he turned it , and how much soever he tried , it went on grinding , and the heap of salt grew higher and higher , until at last the ship sank .
there lies the mill at the bottom of the sea , and still , day by day , it grinds on : and that is why the sea is salt .
