once upon a time an old queen , whose husband had been dead for many years , had a beautiful daughter .
when she grew up she was betrothed to a prince who lived a great way off .
now , when the time drew near for her to be married and to depart into a foreign kingdom , her old mother gave her much costly baggage , and many ornaments , gold and silver , trinkets and knicknacks , and , in fact , everything that belonged to a royal trousseau , for she loved her daughter very dearly .
she gave her a waiting - maid also , who was to ride with her and hand her over to the bridegroom , and she provided each of them with a horse for the journey .
now the princess ' s horse was called falada , and could speak . when the hour for departure drew near the old mother went to her bedroom , and taking a small knife she cut her fingers till they bled ; then she held a white rag under them , and letting three drops of blood fall into it , she gave it to her daughter , and said : " dear child , take great care of this rag : it may be of use to you on the journey .
" so they took a sad farewell of each other , and the princess stuck the rag in front of her dress , mounted her horse , and set forth on the journey to her bridegroom ' s kingdom .
after they had ridden for about an hour the princess began to feel very thirsty , and said to her waiting - maid : " pray get down and fetch me some water in my golden cup out of yonder stream : i would like a drink ."
" if you ' re thirsty ," said the maid , " dismount yourself , and lie down by the water and drink ; i don ' t mean to be your servant any longer ."
the princess was so thirsty that she got down , bent over the stream , and drank , for she wasn ' t allowed to drink out of the golden goblet .
as she drank she murmured : " oh !
heaven , what am i to do ?"
and the three drops of blood replied :" if your mother only knew , her heart would surely break in two .
" but the princess was meek , and said nothing about her maid ' s rude behaviour , and quietly mounted her horse again .
they rode on their way for several miles , but the day was hot , and the sun ' s rays smote fiercely on them , so that the princess was soon overcome by thirst again .
and as they passed a brook she called once more to her waiting - maid : " pray get down and give me a drink from my golden cup ," for she had long ago forgotten her maid ' s rude words .
but the waiting - maid replied , more haughtily even than before : " if you want a drink , you can dismount and get it ; i don ' t mean to be your servant ."
then the princess was compelled by her thirst to get down , and bending over the flowing water she cried and said : " oh !
heaven , what am i to do ?"
and the three drops of blood replied :" if your mother only knew , her heart would surely break in two .
" and as she drank thus , and leant right over the water , the rag containing the three drops of blood fell from her bosom and floated down the stream , and she in her anxiety never even noticed her loss .
but the waiting - maid had observed it with delight , as she knew it gave her power over the bride , for in losing the drops of blood the princess had become weak and powerless .
when she wished to get on her horse falada again , the waiting - maid called out : " i mean to ride falada : you must mount my beast ;" and this too she had to submit to .
then the waiting - maid commanded her harshly to take off her royal robes , and to put on her common ones , and finally she made her swear by heaven not to say a word about the matter when they reached the palace ; and if she hadn ' t taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot .
but falada observed everything , and laid it all to heart . the waiting - maid now mounted falada , and the real bride the worse horse , and so they continued their journey till at length they arrived at the palace yard .
there was great rejoicing over the arrival , and the prince sprang forward to meet them , and taking the waiting - maid for his bride , he lifted her down from her horse and led her upstairs to the royal chamber .
in the meantime the real princess was left standing below in the courtyard .
the old king , who was looking out of his window , beheld her in this plight , and it struck him how sweet and gentle , even beautiful , she looked .
he went at once to the royal chamber , and asked the bride who it was she had brought with her and had left thus standing in the court below .
" oh !"
replied the bride , " i brought her with me to keep me company on the journey ; give the girl something to do , that she mayn ' t be idle ."
but the old king had no work for her , and couldn ' t think of anything ; so he said , " i ' ve a small boy who looks after the geese , she ' d better help him ."
the youth ' s name was curdken , and the real bride was made to assist him in herding geese . soon after this the false bride said to the prince : " dearest husband , i pray you grant me a favour ."
he answered : " that i will ."
" then let the slaughterer cut off the head of the horse i rode here upon , because it behaved very badly on the journey ."
but the truth was she was afraid lest the horse should speak and tell how she had treated the princess .
she carried her point , and the faithful falada was doomed to die .
when the news came to the ears of the real princess she went to the slaughterer , and secretly promised him a piece of gold if he would do something for her .
there was in the town a large dark gate , through which she had to pass night and morning with the geese ; would he " kindly hang up falada ' s head there , that she might see it once again ?"
the slaughterer said he would do as she desired , chopped off the head , and nailed it firmly over the gateway . early next morning , as she and curdken were driving their flock through the gate , she said as she passed under :" oh !
falada , ' tis you hang there ;" and the head replied :" ' tis you ; pass under , princess fair : if your mother only knew , her heart would surely break in two .
" then she left the tower and drove the geese into a field .
and when they had reached the common where the geese fed she sat down and unloosed her hair , which was of pure gold .
curdken loved to see it glitter in the sun , and wanted much to pull some hair out .
then she spoke :" wind , wind , gently sway , blow curdken ' s hat away ; let him chase o ' er field and woldtill my locks of ruddy gold , now astray and hanging down , be combed and plaited in a crown .
" then a gust of wind blew curdken ' s hat away , and he had to chase it over hill and dale .
when he returned from the pursuit she had finished her combing and curling , and his chance of getting any hair was gone .
curdken was very angry , and wouldn ' t speak to her .
so they herded the geese till evening and then went home . the next morning , as they passed under the gate , the girl said :" oh !
falada , ' tis you hang there ;" and the head replied :" ' tis you ; pass under , princess fair : if your mother only knew , her heart would surely break in two .
" then she went on her way till she came to the common , where she sat down and began to comb out her hair ; then curdken ran up to her and wanted to grasp some of the hair from her head , but she called out hastily :" wind , wind , gently sway , blow curdken ' s hat away ; let him chase o ' er field and woldtill my locks of ruddy gold , now astray and hanging down , be combed and plaited in a crown .
" then a puff of wind came and blew curdken ' s hat far away , so that he had to run after it ; and when he returned she had long finished putting up her golden locks , and he couldn ' t get any hair ; so they watched the geese till it was dark . but that evening when they got home curdken went to the old king , and said : " i refuse to herd geese any longer with that girl ."
" for what reason ?"
asked the old king .
" because she does nothing but annoy me all day long ," replied curdken ; and he proceeded to relate all her iniquities , and said : " every morning as we drive the flock through the dark gate she says to a horse ' s head that hangs on the wall :" ' oh !
falada , ' tis you hang there ;' and the head replies :" ' ' tis you ; pass under , princess fair : if your mother only knew , her heart would surely break in two .'
" and curdken went on to tell what passed on the common where the geese fed , and how he had always to chase his hat . the old king bade him go and drive forth his flock as usual next day ; and when morning came he himself took up his position behind the dark gate , and heard how the goose - girl greeted falada .
then he followed her through the field , and hid himself behind a bush on the common .
he soon saw with his own eyes how the goose - boy and the goose - girl looked after the geese , and how after a time the maiden sat down and loosed her hair , that glittered like gold , and repeated :" wind , wind , gently sway , blow curdken ' s hat away ; let him chase o ' er field and woldtill my locks of ruddy goldbe combed and plaited in a crown .
" then a gust of wind came and blew curdken ' s hat away , so that he had to fly over hill and dale after it , and the girl in the meantime quietly combed and plaited her hair : all this the old king observed , and returned to the palace without anyone having noticed him .
in the evening when the goose - girl came home he called her aside , and asked her why she behaved as she did .
" i mayn ' t tell you why ; how dare i confide my woes to anyone ?
for i swore not to by heaven , otherwise i should have lost my life ."
the old king begged her to tell him all , and left her no peace , but he could get nothing out of her .
at last he said : " well , if you won ' t tell me , confide your trouble to the iron stove there ;" and he went away .
then she crept to the stove , and began to sob and cry and to pour out her poor little heart , and said : " here i sit , deserted by all the world , i who am a king ' s daughter , and a false waiting - maid has forced me to take off my own clothes , and has taken my place with my bridegroom , while i have to fulfill the lowly office of goose - girl .
" if my mother only knewher heart would surely break in two .
" but the old king stood outside at the stove chimney , and listened to her words .
then he entered the room again , and bidding her leave the stove , he ordered royal apparel to be put on her , in which she looked amazingly lovely .
then he summoned his son , and revealed to him that he had got the false bride , who was nothing but a waiting - maid , while the real one , in the guise of the ex - goose - girl , was standing at his side .
the young king rejoiced from his heart when he saw her beauty and learnt how good she was , and a great banquet was prepared , to which everyone was bidden .
the bridegroom sat at the head of the table , the princess on one side of him and the waiting - maid on the other ; but she was so dazzled that she did not recognise the princess in her glittering garments .
now when they had eaten and drunk , and were merry , the old king asked the waiting - maid to solve a knotty point for him .
" what ," said he , " should be done to a certain person who has deceived everyone ?"
and he proceeded to relate the whole story , ending up with , " now what sentence should be passed ?"
then the false bride answered : " she deserves to be put stark naked into a barrel lined with sharp nails , which should be dragged by two white horses up and down the street till she is dead .
"" you are the person ," said the king , " and you have passed sentence on yourself ; and even so it shall be done to you ."
and when the sentence had been carried out the young king was married to his real bride , and both reigned over the kingdom in peace and happiness .
