there was once upon a time a widow who had two daughters .
the eldest was so much like her in the face and humour that whoever looked upon the daughter saw the mother .
they were both so disagreeable and so proud that there was no living with them . the youngest , who was the very picture of her father for courtesy and sweetness of temper , was withal one of the most beautiful girls ever seen .
as people naturally love their own likeness , this mother even doted on her eldest daughter , and at the same time had a horrible aversion for the youngest — she made her eat in the kitchen and work continually . among other things , this poor child was forced twice a day to draw water above a mile and a - half off the house , and bring home a pitcher full of it .
one day , as she was at this fountain , there came to her a poor woman , who begged of her to let her drink ." oh !
ay , with all my heart , goody ," said this pretty little girl ; and rinsing immediately the pitcher , she took up some water from the clearest place of the fountain , and gave it to her , holding up the pitcher all the while , that she might drink the easier . the good woman , having drunk , said to her :" you are so very pretty , my dear , so good and so mannerly , that i cannot help giving you a gift ."
for this was a fairy , who had taken the form of a poor country - woman , to see how far the civility and good manners of this pretty girl would go .
" i will give you for gift ," continued the fairy , " that , at every word you speak , there shall come out of your mouth either a flower or a jewel .
" when this pretty girl came home her mother scolded at her for staying so long at the fountain .
" i beg your pardon , mamma ," said the poor girl , " for not making more haste .
" and in speaking these words there came out of her mouth two roses , two pearls , and two diamonds .
" what is it i see there ?"
said her mother , quite astonished .
" i think i see pearls and diamonds come out of the girl ' s mouth !
how happens this , child ?
" this was the first time she ever called her child . the poor creature told her frankly all the matter , not without dropping out infinite numbers of diamonds .
" in good faith ," cried the mother , " i must send my child thither .
come hither , fanny ; look what comes out of thy sister ' s mouth when she speaks .
wouldst not thou be glad , my dear , to have the same gift given to thee ?
thou hast nothing else to do but go and draw water out of the fountain , and when a certain poor woman asks you to let her drink , to give it to her very civilly .
"" it would be a very fine sight indeed ," said this ill - bred minx , " to see me go draw water .
"" you shall go , hussey !"
said the mother ; " and this minute .
" so away she went , but grumbling all the way , taking with her the best silver tankard in the house . she was no sooner at the fountain than she saw coming out of the wood a lady most gloriously dressed , who came up to her , and asked to drink .
this was , you must know , the very fairy who appeared to her sister , but now had taken the air and dress of a princess , to see how far this girl ' s rudeness would go .
" am i come hither ," said the proud , saucy slut , " to serve you with water , pray ?
i suppose the silver tankard was brought purely for your ladyship , was it ?
however , you may drink out of it , if you have a fancy .
"" you are not over and above mannerly ," answered the fairy , without putting herself in a passion .
" well , then , since you have so little breeding , and are so disobliging , i give you for gift that at every word you speak there shall come out of your mouth a snake or a toad .
" so soon as her mother saw her coming she cried out :" well , daughter ?
"" well , mother ?"
answered the pert hussey , throwing out of her mouth two vipers and two toads ." oh !
mercy ," cried the mother ; " what is it i see ?
oh !
it is that wretch her sister who has occasioned all this ; but she shall pay for it "; and immediately she ran to beat her .
the poor child fled away from her , and went to hide herself in the forest , not far from thence . the king ' s son , then on his return from hunting , met her , and seeing her so very pretty , asked her what she did there alone and why she cried ." alas !
sir , my mamma has turned me out of doors .
" the king ' s son , who saw five or six pearls and as many diamonds come out of her mouth , desired her to tell him how that happened .
she hereupon told him the whole story ; and so the king ' s son fell in love with her , and , considering with himself that such a gift was worth more than any marriage portion , conducted her to the palace of the king his father , and there married her . as for the sister , she made herself so much hated that her own mother turned her off ; and the miserable wretch , having wandered about a good while without finding anybody to take her in , went to a corner of the wood , and there died .
