the black monkey said to the tortoise , " tortoise , come and pay me a visit at my place .
do not fail to keep your promise .
" the tortoise accepted the invitation and went at the appointed time .
the black monkey made a great feast in honour of the tortoise ; and the wives of the black monkey prepared a great deal of food — meat and fish of various kinds , manioca bitter and sweet , greens , pottage , palm oil chop , plantains and yams ; all sorts of delicacies . when the tortoise arrived , the black monkey greeted him in a friendly way , and shortly afterward said to him , " tortoise , we are about to commence our feast ; seat yourself in this high chair which i have prepared for you ."
he pointed to a very high chair with steps to reach it .
the tortoise gazed at it , and did not feel happy about it ; the chair was so high , and the tortoise knows nothing about height , he does not know how to climb .
however , he tried , and tried , and tried again ; but could not do it .
every time he tried , he fell back , and covered himself with dust and earth .
at last , he became very angry , and said to his host , " you keep your feast !
i am going home .
after two nights , you come to my place .
" the black monkey waited until the two nights had passed , and then went to the home of the tortoise .
the tortoise came out to meet him with shouts of welcome , crying , you have come ?
you have come ?
my wives , come , and prepare a feast for my friend the black monkey .
" at last the preparations were complete , and the feast ready .
then the tortoise called for a basin of water , which was brought to him .
he said , black monkey , before you eat of my feast , wash your hands ; i will not have you eat with those black hands .
i want them to be quite clean and white like the hands of the otter ."
the black monkey agreed ; and proceeded to wash his hands .
wash , wash , and wash again ; it was useless , his hands were as black as ever . the tortoise said , you are a dirty person ; your hands are black !
you certainly shall not eat my food with such black hands as those !
at that the black monkey flew into a rage ; for he knew that his hands would not become white like those of the otter ; his fate had given him black ones , and it was useless to wash them . the tortoise said , you tricked me ; now i have tricked you : we are quits !
" they shook hands ; one said to the other , " then you are a man of mature age after all ;" and the other said , '' and you are a real man !
" after that they held a feast at the black monkey ' s home , the guests sitting in comfort on mats ; and another at the home of the tortoise , when everything went off well ; and from that time they were friends .
