once upon a time there was a miller ' s servant who had served his master faithfully and diligently for many years .
he had grown old in the mill , and the heavy work that he had to do there finally surpassed his strength .
so one day he said to his master : " i can no longer serve you ; i am too weak .
i am therefore asking you for my dismissal and my wages .
" the miller said : " the time of wandering servants has passed .
you are free to leave if you wish , but you will receive no wages . now the old servant would sooner give up his wages than to continue to be tormented in the mill , so he took leave from his master . before leaving home he went to the animals that until now he had fed and tended , in order to bid them farewell .
while taking leave from the horse , it said to him : " where are you going ?
"" i have to leave ," he said .
" i cannot take it here any longer ."
and when he set forth , the horse followed along after him . he then went to the ox , stroked him once again , and said : " god be with you , old fellow !
"" where are you going ?"
spoke the ox .
" oh , i must leave .
i cannot take it here any longer ," said the miller ' s servant and sadly went on his way to take leave from the dog .
the ox followed along behind , just as the horse had done .
and the other animals to whom he said farewell -- the dog , the cat , and the goose -- all did the same thing . he made his way out into the country , where he first noticed that the faithful animals were following him .
he spoke to them in a friendly manner , asking them to turn around and return home .
" i have nothing more for myself ," he said , " and i can no longer care for you ."
but the animals told him that they would not abandon him , and they contentedly followed along behind . after several days they came to a great forest .
here the horse and the ox found good grass , which the goose and the rooster enjoyed as well .
however , the other animals -- the cat and the dog -- had to suffer hunger , as did the old miller ' s servant ; but they did not grumble and complain .
finally , after having gone very deep into the forest , they suddenly saw a large , beautiful house before them .
it was locked up securely .
only an empty stall was open , and from here they could go through the barn into the house itself . because no one could be seen in the house , the servant decided to stay there with his animals , and he assigned each one to a place .
he put the horse up front in the stall .
he led the ox to the other side .
the rooster was given a place on the roof , the dog on the manure pile , the cat on the hearth , and the goose behind the stove .
then he gave each one his feed , which was plentifully stored in the house .
he himself ate and drank all he wanted , then fell asleep in a good bed , which was all made up in the bedroom . during the night , while he was fast asleep , the robber -- who owned the forest house -- returned .
as he stepped into yard , the dog jumped on him furiously , and barked at him .
the rooster cried down from the roof : " cock - a - doodle - doo , cock - a - doodle - doo !"
all this terrified the robber , for he had never seen farm animals that live with people , knowing instead only the wild animals of the forest .
he fled hurriedly into the stall , but there the horse kicked out from behind , hitting him in the side .
he staggered around and around , and only with difficulty could he retreat into the back part of the stall .
he scarcely arrived there when the ox turned around and tried to pick him up on his horns .
this frightened him anew , and he ran as fast as he could through the barn and into the kitchen , where he wanted to strike a light and see what was there .
feeling around the hearth , he touched the cat , which jumped on him and scratched him with its claws until jumped away head over heels , and tried to hide behind the stove in the main room .
the goose jumped up , screaming and beating its wings .
the terrified robber fled into the bedroom .
there the miller ' s servant was snoring mightily like a purring spinning wheel , and the robber thought the entire room was filled with strangers .
you had better believe that he was overcome by a terrible fear .
he rushed out of the house and ran into the woods , not stopping until until he had found his fellow robbers . he began talking : " i don ' t know what has happened in our house .
some strange people are living there .
when i stepped into the yard a large wildman jumped at me , yelling and bellowing so terribly that i thought he would kill me .
an another one cheered him on , calling down from the roof : ' hit him for me too !
hit him for me too !'
the first one was bad enough ; i wasn ' t going to wait for more of them to jump me , so i fled into the stall .
there a shoemaker threw a last at my side , and i can still feel where it hit .
i ran to the back of the stall .
a pitchfork maker was standing there who tried to impale me on his pitchfork .
i ran into the kitchen , where a hackle maker beat me with his hackle [ a sharp - toothed tool for combing flax ].
i tried to hide behind the stove , but there was a shovel maker there who beat me with his shovel .
finally i ran into the bedroom , but there were so many others snoring in there that was happy to escape with my life .
" when the robbers heard this , they were so horrified that not a one of them had any desire to enter the house .
to the contrary , they believed that the entire region was threatened by these strange people .
that same night they departed for another country , and they never returned . the miller ' s servant lived in peace in the robbers ' house with his faithful animals .
he no longer had to suffer in his old age , for the beautiful garden next to the house produced more fruit , vegetables , and all kinds of food every year than he and his animals could eat .
