once there was a lion , a hyena , a fox , an ostrich and a hare , which together owned a bunch of camels .
they took turns every day to bring the animals out to the pasture , except for the lion , who stayed home , because he was the king of beasts . one day the fox and ostrich went out together to feed the camels .
when the animals started grazing , fox asked the ostrich , whether he would like to look after the animals , or would rather find xabag for their lunch . the ostrich chose to keep an eye on the camels , while the fox went off to collect lunch . fox wrapped the sticky mass of the xabag around two stones .
" go ahead ," said the fox , " eat these two pieces of delicious xabag ". the ostrich at once swallowed the two stones , which got stuck in its throat .
" call the animals together and sing for them so we can get them home ," said the fox .
" wuu - uu - uu - mm ," muttered the ostrich .
" you should not scare the camels ," said the fox . when they got home , fox told the lion that the ostrich had frightened the camels .
" what ' s the matter with you ?"
asked the lion .
" wu - uu - uu - mm ," muttered the ostrich .
" see , he does it on purpose ," said the fox . the lion hit the ostrich and broke his neck . the next day the fox the hare were asked to go herding the animals . at noon the fox drank some milk of the milk that the lion had hidden in a secret place .
the fox took a little of the cream and pretended to play with the hare and sprayed some cream on his lips .
" who drank my milk ? "
the lion asked when they came home .
" i do not know , but the hare has cream on the lips ," said the fox . lion discovered the cream of the hare ' s lips and killed him . next morning the lion killed one of the camels and invited all the animals to share the meat among themselves . first he asked the hyena to divide the meat . hyena divided it into two halves .
" one half is for the lion and the other half is for the rest of us ," said the hyena . lion was not happy with hyena ' s way of dividing the meat , and hit him on the side of his head .
one of hyena ' s eyes fell out .
" come here , fox , now you need to divide it ," ordered the king .
" one third of the meat is for us , two - thirds are for the lion ...... no , no .
i make a new partition .
lion must have it all !"
the fox concluded .
" well , who taught you to share ? "
asked the lion amused .
" hyena ' s drooping eye has taught me how to do it ," said the fox . one day fox asked whether he would be allowed to make a new mat for the lion , because his old one was starting to wear down .
in his stead , the lion could then take care of the camels that day . lion accepted the fox ' s proposals and shooed the animals out to pasture . the fox dug a big hole inside the lion ' s cabin , filled it with hot charcoal and covered it over with branches and grass . when the lion came home in the evening , the fox led him to his new mat and asked the lion lie down on it to try it .
the lion lay down and fell into the burning charcoal , where he died . finally , the one - eyed hyena asked the fox to remove a blade of grass that had been in his eye .
" it ' s easy enough , come here , i ' ll take it out ," said the fox . the fox took a pointed stick and stuck hyena ' s other eye out and he went blind . that is how the fox came to be the sole owner of the camels .
